                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          YUKHÍTI KÓY                                                               
                                                                                    
          A REFERENCE GRAMMAR   OF THE ATAKAPA LANGUAGE                             
                                                                                    
          WITH TRANSLATED AND ANALYZED TEXTS AND VOCABULARY                         
                                                                                    
          COMPILED BY GEOFFREY KIMBALL                                              
                                                                                    
          FROM THE FIELD NOTES OF ALBERT SAMUEL GATSCHET, PROVIDED BY KIŠYUC AND TOTTOKŠ
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          1                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS                                                          
                                                                                    
               This book was made possible by a legacy from the late Dr. Stephen Lee Pearce, Esq.,
                                                                                    
          without whose support this work could not have been accomplished. I thank theDr… two
                                                                                    
          anonymous reviewers whose comments and suggestions greatly improved the content of the
                                                                                    
          book; I also thank Heather Stauffer and Matthew Bokovoy of the University of Nebraska Press
                                                                                    
          for their expert assistance in shepherding this project to its successful completion. I should like
                                                                                    
          to thank Dr. David V. Kaufman for acting as a liaison with the Atakapa-Ishak Tribe, and tribal
                                                                                    
          councilor Dr. Jeffery Darensbourg for his support and assistance.         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          2                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          CONTENTS                                                                  
                                                                                    
          Preface                                                                   
                                                                                    
          Introduction                                                              
                                                                                    
          1. Phonology                                                              
                                                                                    
               Orthography                                                          
                                                                                    
               Phonemes                                                             
                                                                                    
                    Consonants                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                         Geminate consonants                                        
                                                                                    
                    Vowels                                                          
                                                                                    
                         Vowel length                                               
                                                                                    
                    Syllabic nasals                                                 
                                                                                    
               Accent                                                               
                                                                                    
                    Pitch levels                                                    
                                                                                    
                    Verbal accentuation                                             
                                                                                    
                    Nominal accentuation                                            
                                                                                    
                    Unexpected accentuation                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Phonetic processes                                                   
                                                                                    
                    Vowel weakening                                                 
                                                                                    
                    Aspiration                                                      
                                                                                    
                    H-stopping                                                      
                                                                                    
                    Variable initial h                                              
                                                                                    
                    Status of orthographic x                                        
                                                                                    
               Active phonological processes                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          3                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                    Consonant assimilation                                          
                                                                                    
                    Vowel coalescence                                               
                                                                                    
                    Allophonic variation                                            
                                                                                    
                    Initial syllable syncope                                        
                                                                                    
          2. The verb and verbal morphology                                         
                                                                                    
               The aorist mode                                                      
                                                                                    
                    Hortative and imperative                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                    Object/Patient prefixes                                         
                                                                                    
               Preterite mode                                                       
                                                                                    
               Dubitative mode                                                      
                                                                                    
               Future mode                                                          
                                                                                    
               Progressive mode                                                     
                                                                                    
               Subordinate mode                                                     
                                                                                    
                    The suffix -n̥                                                  
                                                                                    
                    The suffix -kin                                                 
                                                                                    
                    The suffix -ip                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Gerund                                                               
                                                                                    
               Participle                                                           
                                                                                    
               Stative verbs                                                        
                                                                                    
               Negation                                                             
                                                                                    
               Aspect suffixes                                                      
                                                                                    
                    Almost                                                          
                                                                                    
                    Completion                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          4                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                    Desiderative                                                    
                                                                                    
                    Continuative                                                    
                                                                                    
                    Future continuative                                             
                                                                                    
                    Customary                                                       
                                                                                    
                    Habitual                                                        
                                                                                    
                    Before                                                          
                                                                                    
                    Past progressive                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                    The phrase terminal marker                                      
                                                                                    
               Verbal prefixes                                                      
                                                                                    
                    Reflexive                                                       
                                                                                    
                    Reciprocal                                                      
                                                                                    
                    Third-person plural object                                      
                                                                                    
                    First-person prefixes                                           
                                                                                    
                    Second-person prefixes                                          
                                                                                    
                    Indefinite object                                               
                                                                                    
                    Incorporated nouns                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                    Locational and directional verbal prefixes                      
                                                                                    
                         Action performed sitting                                   
                                                                                    
                         Action performed standing                                  
                                                                                    
                         Action performed standing (plural)                         
                                                                                    
                         Motion towards                                             
                                                                                    
                         Motion coming                                              
                                                                                    
                         Motion back                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          5                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                         Motion upwards                                             
                                                                                    
                         Action done with an instrument                             
                                                                                    
               Adjectives                                                           
                                                                                    
               Adverbs                                                              
                                                                                    
               Comparison of adjectives                                             
                                                                                    
               Verbal derivational processes                                        
                                                                                    
                    Root verbalization                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                    Verbal derivational suffixes                                    
                                                                                    
                         The causative                                              
                                                                                    
                         The transitivizer                                          
                                                                                    
                         The suffix -šim ‘to be nothing but N’                      
                                                                                    
                         The valence-change suffix -c                               
                                                                                    
                    Detransitivizing prefixes                                       
                                                                                    
                    Verb derivation by prefixation                                  
                                                                                    
               Verb pluralization                                                   
                                                                                    
                    Reduplication                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                         Simple reduplication                                       
                                                                                    
                         Reduplication with infixation                              
                                                                                    
                    Plurals in -m                                                   
                                                                                    
               Suppletion                                                           
                                                                                    
          3. Nouns and nominal morphology                                           
                                                                                    
               Animacy                                                              
                                                                                    
               Mass status                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          6                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Ordering of nominal morphology                                       
                                                                                    
               Nominal cases                                                        
                                                                                    
                    Ergative case                                                   
                                                                                    
                    Absolutive                                                      
                                                                                    
                    Directional case                                                
                                                                                    
                    Locative case                                                   
                                                                                    
                    Elative case                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                    Inessive case                                                   
                                                                                    
               Noun pluralization                                                   
                                                                                    
                    Prefixed pluralization                                          
                                                                                    
                    Suffixed pluralization                                          
                                                                                    
                    Adjectival pluralization                                        
                                                                                    
                    Irregular pluralization                                         
                                                                                    
                    Nouns plural in form, but singular in meaning                   
                                                                                    
               Noun possession                                                      
                                                                                    
               Pronouns                                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Deictics                                                             
                                                                                    
               Postpositions                                                        
                                                                                    
               Numerals                                                             
                                                                                    
               Noun formation                                                       
                                                                                    
          4. Syntax                                                                 
                                                                                    
               Ergativity                                                           
                                                                                    
               Fluid-S marking                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          7                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Word order                                                           
                                                                                    
               Locative compounds                                                   
                                                                                    
               Focus                                                                
                                                                                    
               Clausal complements                                                  
                                                                                    
               Conjunction and disjunction                                          
                                                                                    
                    Nominal conjunction and disjunction                             
                                                                                    
                    Verbal conjunction and disjunction                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                    Independent conjunctions                                        
                                                                                    
               Omitted inflection in coordinate contexts                            
                                                                                    
               Relative clause equivalents                                          
                                                                                    
               Interrogative sentences                                              
                                                                                    
               Idiomatic expressions                                                
                                                                                    
          5. Texts                                                                  
                                                                                    
               Text 1. Cultural and historical topics.                              
                                                                                    
               Text 2. The Skin-desirer                                             
                                                                                    
               Text 3. Treatment of the heads of infants                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Text 4. Form letter                                                  
                                                                                    
               Text 5. Biographical sketch of Kišmok                                
                                                                                    
               Text 6. Notes on the family of Tottokš                               
                                                                                    
               Text 7. Traditional treatment of disease                             
                                                                                    
               Text 8. Traditional burial practices                                 
                                                                                    
               Text 9. A fight among Black people in Lake Charles                   
                                                                                    
          References                                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          8                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Yukhíti-English vocabulary                                                
                                                                                    
          Appendices                                                                
                                                                                    
               Appendix I Hiyékiti-English Vocabulary                               
                                                                                    
               Appendix II Orkokisak-English Vocabulary                             
                                                                                    
               Appendix III Kinship terminology                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          9                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          List of illustrations.                                                    
                                                                                    
          Illustration 1. The first page of Gatschet’s field notes.                 
                                                                                    
          Illustration 2. Text 1 in Gatschet’s field notes.                         
                                                                                    
          List of tables.                                                           
                                                                                    
          Table 1. Gatschet’s transcriptions of Atakapa phonemes                    
                                                                                    
          Table 2. Reconstructed pronunciation of Atakapa phonemes                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         10                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          PREFACE                                                                   
                                                                                    
            At the time when Europeans first entered what is now the Southeastern United States, people
                                                                                    
          speaking related languages occupied the coastal strip from Vermillion Bay in Louisiana
                                                                                    
          westward to Galveston Bay in Texas, living in small bands of seasonally migrating hunter-
                                                                                    
          gatherers. The people in the west, the Orkokisak, were known to the Spanish as the Orcoquizac1,
                                                                                    
          while those living in the middle of their range, the Yukhíti, and those living to the east, the
                                                                                    
          Hiyékiti, were given the name hattak ápa by the Choctaw, and this was adopted in English as
                                                                                    
          Atakapa. The Choctaw name means ‘eaters of human beings;’ however, all acts of cannibalism
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          attributed to them seem to be anecdotal as opposed to observational.2 The people who spoke
                                                                                    
          what we may call Atakapan languages were very much isolated from European settlement and as
                                                                                    
          a rule did not come into conflict with Europeans. Being isolated, their languages were little
                                                                                    
          noted. In 1721 Jean Bérenger captured nine Indians at Galveston Bay, and recorded 45 words of
                                                                                    
          their language; this is the only material known for the Orkokisak, or the Western Atakapa. In
                                                                                    
          1802 Martin Duralde collected a vocabulary of 287 words in Franklin, Louisiana, near
                                                                                    
          Vermillion Bay; this is the only documentation for Hiyékiti, or Eastern Atakapa. The late
                                                                                    
          eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries saw a drastic fall in the Atakapa population, by the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          middle of the nineteenth century many speakers of Orkokisak and Hiyékiti had amalgamated
                                                                                    
          with the Yukhíti living along the Calcasieu River in Louisiana. The population continued to fall;
                                                                                    
          by 1850, there were only two villages left, Túl Núŋ and Ló, on the east and west sides of Lake
                                                                                    
          Prien on the Calcasieu River. In January, 1885, Albert Samuel Gatschet came to Lake Charles,
                                                                                    
          Louisiana, and found and worked with the two most knowledgeable speakers of the language
                                                                                    
          there in Túl Núŋ, the last surviving village. At the time, he found the community to be
                                                                                    
          dispersing, with speakers of the language moving away to Texas and Oklahoma. Although he
                                                                                    
                                         11                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          published a plea for more people to work on the language, no one else, aside from John R.
                                                                                    
          Swanton, ever did. Thus, Gatschet’s field notes are the only source for deriving a grammar of
                                                                                    
          the language.                                                             
                                                                                    
            John R. Swanton wrote a grammatical sketch of Atakapa (1929) based on Gatschet’s notes,
                                                                                    
          and then in 1932 published under Gatschet’s name and his own the texts that Gatschet had
                                                                                    
          gathered, and then a dictionary under the entries of which he included the majority of the words
                                                                                    
          and sentences that Gatschet had collected.                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            Atakapa is the only American Indian language of the Southeast on which no serious work has
                                                                                    
          been done in over eighty years. The grammar is essentially unknown, the phonology is unclear,
                                                                                    
          and the vocabulary is difficult to use. As Swanton’s publication is the only easily accessible
                                                                                    
          source for Atakapa, almost all examples are cited in the form in which they occur therein.
                                                                                    
          However, Gatschet’s original field notes (1885a; 1885b; and 1885c) have been used in
                                                                                    
          preference to this material, and when appropriate, his original recordings are used.
                                                                                    
            Despite the fact that Atakapa has not been used as a spoken language for at least three
                                                                                    
          quarters of a century, interest in it still exists, as shown by the publications of people such as
                                                                                    
          Singleton (2000a; 2000b) who have Atakapa as a heritage language, and the existence of a
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Facebook pages dedicated to the language. Thus a reference grammar is of more than just
                                                                                    
          academic interest.                                                        
                                                                                    
          <Insert Illustration 1 after this page>                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         12                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          INTRODUCTION.                                                             
                                                                                    
          The Atakapa language is attested almost entirely through the work of Albert S. Gatschet, which
                                                                                    
          he did in January of 1885 with two speakers of the language, Kišyuc (‘Will-o’-the-wisp’), also
                                                                                    
          known as Yoyot, and her cousin Tottokš (‘Round [Eyes]’), whose English names were Louison
                                                                                    
          Huntington3 (born ca. 1830, died ca. 1905) and Delilah Moss4 (born ca. 1831, died ca. 1920).
                                                                                    
          Gatschet (1885d) indicates that they were the oldest and best-informed Atakapa speakers of his
                                                                                    
          day. He also made the comment: “The remnants of the old Atakapa are reduced to a few women
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          who in 1888 lived a few miles south of Lake Charles R. R. station” (1903), indicating that they
                                                                                    
          resided in the village of Túl Núŋ. Gatschet himself searched tirelessly for speakers of American
                                                                                    
          Indian languages, literally traveling across the continent, often working in primitive conditions.
                                                                                    
          In Louisiana alone between 1885 and 1886, in addition to Atakapa he documented Tunica,
                                                                                    
          Chitimacha, Biloxi, and two dialects of Choctaw.                          
                                                                                    
            John R. Swanton collected a small amount of material from Teet Verdine (1854-1925)5 in
                                                                                    
          1907 and Armojean Reon (1873-1925)6, in 1908, but by that time, speakers of the language seem
                                                                                    
          to have been reticent to talk to strangers about it.7                     
                                                                                    
            A little linguistic information exists for the Atakapa living in Texas (the Orkokisak) at the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          westernmost part of their range, and rather more for the Atakapa at the easternmost part of their
                                                                                    
          range (called by Swanton the Eastern Dialect, and by Yukhíti-speakers Hiyékiti). Both groups
                                                                                    
          had sufficiently different phonological forms of words, as compared to the better-attested
                                                                                    
          Yukhíti (Central Atakapa) of the lakes at the mouth of the Calcasieu River in Louisiana, to
                                                                                    
          indicate that their languages were more than just dialects of each other.8
                                                                                    
          Orkokisak oc        tiniƛ     iš        oƛ        keš                     
                                                                                    
          Yukhíti   úc        itiyílš   kakáw9    wó·l      te·š                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         13                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Hiyékiti  ict       teŋi·ƛešt nak       wil       taheš                   
                                                                                    
                    ‘nose’    ‘moon’    ‘sun’     ‘eye’     ‘hair’                  
                                                                                    
            This grammar is based on the assumption that Gatschet recorded what he heard to the best of
                                                                                    
          his ability, and that discrepancies between items recorded at different times should be
                                                                                    
          rationalized first by processes within the language itself before assuming mis-hearing on the part
                                                                                    
          of Gatschet. Because Swanton’s publication of Gatschet’s field notes is the only available
                                                                                    
          source for others to reference while following this grammar, the vast majority of the examples
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          and all of the texts are presented in the form found in the publication; references to the source of
                                                                                    
          these examples is provided in every case. Examples are taken from Gatschet’s field notes when
                                                                                    
          the published form is incomplete, segmented when the original is not, or mistranscribed.
                                                                                    
            All examples in the grammar are given a reference after the translation. For examples taken
                                                                                    
          from the dictionary part of the publication the reference is of the form (1932:44:1), where the
                                                                                    
          second number is the page number, and the third number is the column number. For examples
                                                                                    
          taken from the texts in the publication the reference is of the form (1932:14:71); the second
                                                                                    
          number is the page number, and the third number is the continuous line number assigned by
                                                                                    
          Swanton. Examples taken directly from Gatschet’s field notes have the form (1885b:17), where
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          the first number refers to the specific one of the three notebooks, and the second number to the
                                                                                    
          page number on which the example is found. The transcription of the Atakapa as found in the
                                                                                    
          publication is enclosed in square brackets; the transcription as found in Gatschet’s field notes is
                                                                                    
          given in curly brackets. English translation of the Atakapa is based on my understanding of the
                                                                                    
          material, and not necessarily on the glosses of Gatschet, or the translation found in Gatschet and
                                                                                    
          Swanton. For considerations of space, Atakapa forms in lists do not have the original
                                                                                    
          transcriptions, nor is justification provided in the cases where the accent I write differs from the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         14                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          accent published in Gatschet and Swanton. For the purposes of this grammar, the term Atakapa
                                                                                    
          will refer to the language spoken by Kišyuc and Tottokš; however, when it needs to be compared
                                                                                    
          with the two other Atakapan languages, Orkokisak and Hiyékiti, it will be called Yukhíti in order
                                                                                    
          to avoid the long-established, but inaccurate, geographical names for the languages.
                                                                                    
          Other Work on Atakapa. Prior to Gatschet’s fieldwork, the only publication of any Atakapa
                                                                                    
          linguistic material was the word list of Eastern Atakapa gathered by Martin Duralde in Albert
                                                                                    
          Gallatin’s 1836 publication. In 1929 Swanton published a grammatical sketch of the language
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          based on Gatschet’s field work. Although he had some sharp insights, such as realizing that
                                                                                    
          nouns and verbs are structurally identical, on the whole the work is handicapped by being pre-
                                                                                    
          phonemic, and being written before most modern grammatical and theoretical work had been
                                                                                    
          done. There has been no serious grammatical study of Atakapa since Swanton.
                                                                                    
            In his publication of 1932 Swanton re-transcribed all of Gatschet’s material, and inevitably as
                                                                                    
          part of the process of preparing the work for publication, errors, both typographical and of
                                                                                    
          interpretation crept in. For example, the two sentences, “Don’t pinch the cat; she might bite
                                                                                    
          you,” and “My cousin has come back from the Mississippi River,” were each split into two parts,
                                                                                    
          and the fragments placed in four different parts of the publication. In addition, the dictionary was
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          not arranged by words, but by roots that Swanton saw, or thought he saw, in the Atakapa
                                                                                    
          material. In some cases distinct and unrelated words are thrown together due to similarities in
                                                                                    
          phonology or semantics, as for example iwa·t ‘to move in the direction of the speaker,’ is listed
                                                                                    
          under the hypothetical root *o ‘to come,’ because Gatschet had glossed examples of this verb
                                                                                    
          with English ‘come.’                                                      
                                                                                    
            Swanton’s work was used as a source by Morris Swadesh for his publications comparing
                                                                                    
          Atakapa and Chitimacha (1946b and 1947), and again served as a source for Karl-Heinz
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         15                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Gursky’s publication (1969) comparing Atakapa, Chitimacha, and Tunica. Neither author did
                                                                                    
          any further grammatical work on the Atakapa material. A recent publication on Atakapa is
                                                                                    
          Kaufman (2014), which is a retranscription and examination of the first Atakapa text in Gatschet
                                                                                    
          and Swanton; this last is included in Kaufman (2019b). Kaufman has also reorganized the
                                                                                    
          vocabulary section of Gatschet and Swanton as a learner’s dictionary (2019a).
                                                                                    
          Gatschet’s field notes. There are three field notebooks that Gatschet used for his field work.
                                                                                    
          The first one I call 1885a (as it is first in the archival box at the National Anthropological
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Archives) is a disbound copy of John Wesley Powell’s Introduction to the Study of Indian
                                                                                    
          Languages (1880).                                                         
                                                                                    
          Gatschet filled in the book’s schedules at times from his principal field notebook, at others he
                                                                                    
          elicited items directly from the book and did not enter them in his principal notebook. The
                                                                                    
          second notebook (1885b) is Gatschet’s principal field notebook. Pages 3 to 115 contain linguistic
                                                                                    
          material provided by Kišyuc, written in black ink. Starting on page 115 the material was
                                                                                    
          provided by Tottokš, and is written in red ink. As Gatschet worked with Tottokš, he went over
                                                                                    
          all of the material of Kišyuc, and made annotations and emendations in red ink. The material
                                                                                    
          from Tottokš up to page 148 is written in red ink, after which, seemingly having finished going
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          over the earlier material, he switched back to black ink, which he used to the end of the notebook
                                                                                    
          on page 175. In addition to the Atakapa field notes, pages 24 and 25 contain a vocabulary of
                                                                                    
          Mobilian written in pencil, and pages 177-78 have comparisons between Atakapa and
                                                                                    
          Chitimacha, and 179-80 a short index. The third notebook (1885c), which is unpaginated,
                                                                                    
          consists of ten pages of verb paradigms and short sentences, many of which do not occur in his
                                                                                    
          main notebook. It is written partly in ink and partly in pencil. This notebook does not seem to
                                                                                    
          have been used by Swanton.                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         16                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Notes                                                                     
                                                                                    
          1. Swanton (1932:1) re-named them the Akokisa, apparently after John Sibley’s 1805 spelling of
                                                                                    
          the name as Accokesaw. The name can be reconstructed as Orkokisak, ‘persimmon gathering
                                                                                    
          people,’ Yukhíti ol ‘persimmon’ kokiš ‘take something from someone,’ and iša·k ‘people.’ This
                                                                                    
          is similar to the name of the southernmost band of the Caddo, the na šitˀuš ‘pawpaw people.’
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          (Chafe, nd:72)                                                            
                                                                                    
          2. The lack of attested acts of cannibalism is noted in Post (1962:25-26). In the traditional
                                                                                    
          literature of the Chitimacha, cannibal Indians are the Karankawa, who lived southwest of the
                                                                                    
          Orkokisak (Swadesh, 1950:A.37), in that of the Koasati, the cannibals are the Tonkawa, who
                                                                                    
          lived to the northwest of the Orkokisak (Kimball, 2010:230-33). It may well be that hattak ápa
                                                                                    
          was simply an ethnic slur, given by a technologically more advanced people, cf. the Nahuatl
                                                                                    
          name for a less-advanced ethnic group in Mexico, cuitlateca, or ‘shit-people.’
                                                                                    
          3. She took her surname from that of her son-in-law or husband, Ambrose Huntington. Both
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Gatschet’s and Swanton’s notes on the interrelationships of the Atakapa speakers are elliptical
                                                                                    
          and confusing, and US Census records miss them for decades at a time.     
                                                                                    
          4. Swanton also gives her name as Delia Morse (1911:362) and Delilah Morse (1929), but in his
                                                                                    
          1907 notebook he calls her Delilah Verdine. In Gatschet’s field notes her English name is given
                                                                                    
          as Dalila or Delila Moss. In official records her name is even more varied, appearing as Dalila
                                                                                    
          Clifton, Dolly Clifton, Della Moss, and Dolly Moss.                       
                                                                                    
          5. Teet (in official records Tete or Tate) was a nickname. His actual name was Rosemond
                                                                                    
          Verdine; he seems to have been the brother of Tottokš.                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         17                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          6. Armojean Reon’s official name was Onezime Reon. He seems to have used both names
                                                                                    
          throughout his life. He likely was a grandson of Kišyuc.                  
                                                                                    
          7. Swanton’s quote is instructive: “This material taken May 8 [1907] from an Attacapa named
                                                                                    
          Teet Verdine at Sulphur Station. Tried him and his sister, Eliza Verdine, on a few words but
                                                                                    
          with rather poor success. They know many words and expressions, but do not recognize
                                                                                    
          quickly.” (Swanton, 1907 NAA MS4201:189:13). Swanton apparently also did some field work
                                                                                    
          with Tottokš, as occasional comments in the publication indicate. However, the field notes of his
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          work with her, and with Armojean Reon, seem not to have survived.         
                                                                                    
          8. Hiyékiti forms are retranscribed from Manuscript 1627, National Anthropological Archives,
                                                                                    
          Smithsonian Institution, pp. 195-201; Orkokisak forms are retranscribed from de Villiers du
                                                                                    
          Terrage (1919:435-36); see Appendices II and III.                         
                                                                                    
           Although Yukhíti and Hiyékiti were closely related languages, they were not completely
                                                                                    
          mutually intelligible. The following comment is recorded by Gatschet: “Hiyékiti, the easterners,
                                                                                    
          au du soleil levant, name of the tribe from which Fanchonette [came]. L(ouison) understood
                                                                                    
          almost all she said, but could not talk it.” (1885b:53)                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          9. There is a Yukhíti synonym that is cognate to the Hiyékiti form, lák ‘sun.’
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         18                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          1. PHONOLOGY                                                              
                                                                                    
          Orthography. Reconstructing the phonology from the record is difficult. Table I shows the
                                                                                    
          symbols that Gatschet used in his field notes. Although Swanton provides a table of phonetic
                                                                                    
          signs (1932, 6-7) the actual phonemic equivalence is not clear. Because Gatschet’s field notes
                                                                                    
          had been recorded in a then-old-fashioned way, Swanton tacitly updated the material to a newer
                                                                                    
          phonetic system, which itself today is long-outdated, as it pre-phonemic.1 Among the more
                                                                                    
          problematic symbols used are the orthographic hyphen and the orthographic apostrophe.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Orthographic hyphen. The hyphen is used throughout the dictionary; this is based on
                                                                                    
          Gatschet’s usage in his field notes. The temptation is to read it as a hiatus, and thus a glottal
                                                                                    
          stop, as Swadesh 1946b:115) suggested, however, close examination of orthographic variation
                                                                                    
          shows that the hyphen is frequently used to indicate a syllable-ending w or y (for example [ka-u]
                                                                                    
          ‘die,’ [kawat] ‘died,’ [coko-i] ‘chief’ [cokoyat] ‘was chief,’ [te-u] ‘upstream,’ [tewike] ‘from
                                                                                    
          upstream’). A hyphen also is used between identical vowels instead of h: [ha-an] hahan ‘not
                                                                                    
          having,’ [hatse-ec] haceheš ‘bad;’ and [tso-ots] cohoc ‘corn.’ Furthermore, a hyphen is
                                                                                    
          occasionally used to mark a morpheme boundary [puns-mickectsĕl] punš-miškeš-cel ‘we blow it
                                                                                    
          around in a circle.’ Inspection of Gatschet’s field notes shows that he used a hyphen when he
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          had to break a word at the end of a line, which hyphens Swanton published without deleting. In
                                                                                    
          addition, Gatschet used an equals sign (=) when he recognized a morpheme boundary.
                                                                                    
          Orthographic apostrophe. Swanton describes orthographic apostrophe as a pause, which one
                                                                                    
          might assume to mean a glottal stop. However, when one observes its usage in the publication
                                                                                    
          (which follows Gatschet’s usage in his field notes), the apostrophe usually occurs before n, and
                                                                                    
          in fact indicates that the n is syllabic ([ˈntol a] n̥.tól á ‘Are you well?’). There is only one word
                                                                                    
          where the apostrophe looks as if it indicates a glottal stop, [ˈnˈox] ‘red face paint’ (also written
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         19                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          [ˈnˈo] and [ĕnˈox]), which might seem to represent the pronunciation *n̥Ɂoh. However, this
                                                                                    
          word with a glottal stop would be unique, so another interpretation must be found. Initial h in
                                                                                    
          Atakapa seems to have been very weakly articulated, and was often not written by Gatschet. It
                                                                                    
          seems most likely then that the second apostrophe represents h, and the word is retranscribed as
                                                                                    
          n̥hóh /n̥.hóh/.                                                           
                                                                                    
          Atakapa phonemes. The following are the phonemes of Atakapa:              
                                                                                    
          Stops:         p    t    c(ʦ) k    (Ɂ)                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Fricatives          ƛ(tł) š        h                                      
                                                                                    
          Resonant            l                                                     
                                                                                    
          Nasals         m    n         ŋ                                           
                                                                                    
          Semivowels     w    y                                                     
                                                                                    
          Vowels              i, i·     u                                           
                                                                                    
                              e, e·     o, o·                                       
                                                                                    
                                   a, a·                                            
                                                                                    
                              (m̥ )     n̥                                          
                                                                                    
          <Insert Table I and Table II near here>                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Consonants. The stops seem to have been fortis and aspirated; very rarely are they written with
                                                                                    
          the symbols for the corresponding voiced consonants. In final position they seem to have been
                                                                                    
          unreleased. The glottal stop is a marginal phoneme; it needs to be postulated only for purposes
                                                                                    
          of reduplication. Word-initial vowels may have an initial glottal stop; if so, it is non-distinctive.
                                                                                    
            All the fricatives have positional variants. The phoneme ƛ has the phonetic form of a
                                                                                    
          voiceless lateral affricate, ƛ (tł) in syllable initial position (/ƛemƛem/ ‘torn (pl)’) and the phonetic
                                                                                    
          form of a lateral fricative, ɬ in medial or syllable-final position (/teɬk/ ‘flower’ /aɬiš/ ‘to lose’). It
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         20                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          does not occur regularly in word-final position; comparative evidence suggests that word-final ƛ
                                                                                    
          has fallen together with l (wo·l ‘eye,’ Orkokisak o·λ [audle]). The very few examples of ƛ in
                                                                                    
          word-final position suggest that it was pronounced as a voiced lateral affricate λ (dʫ), [ōˊdl] /ó·λ/
                                                                                    
          ó·l ‘nearby.’ It would appear that historically this phoneme was a lateral fricative, ł, in all
                                                                                    
          positions, which became affricated in initial and final position. Because of the consistently
                                                                                    
          different pronunciations of this phoneme, it will be written both as ƛ and ł in this grammar.
                                                                                    
            The phoneme š has the phonetic form s when it forms a cluster with t or n as an initial or final
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          member, or forms a cluster with itself. (/yukits/ ‘as for us,’ /nomšsim/ ‘nothing but children’)
                                                                                    
          The phoneme h has the phonetic form x as the initial member of a consonant cluster (/haxšat/
                                                                                    
          ‘she did not have.’)                                                      
                                                                                    
            The nasal consonant ŋ occurs only in root-final position (é·ŋ ‘name’), however it can appear
                                                                                    
          in syllable-initial position before a suffix (é·ŋip ‘by name.’)           
                                                                                    
            The semi-vowel w is devoiced in syllable-final position before a stop consonant (áwp /aw̥ p/
                                                                                    
          ‘right here,’ written [aˊxp ~ aˊvp]), when devoiced before other consonants, w is written [f], as in
                                                                                    
          [etwiˊfc] /hətwíφš/ hatwíwš ‘he thinks.’ At times in syllable-final position or syllable-medial
                                                                                    
          position w is a voiced bilabial fricative, β, and is written [v] as in [ivivhaˊhět] /hiβíβháhət/
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          hiwíwháhat ‘he did not believe me.’ The liquid l is devoiced before the sibilant š (polpólštit
                                                                                    
          /polpól̥štit/ ‘they are galloping.’                                       
                                                                                    
          Geminate consonants. As a rule, Gatschet did not write geminate consonants. There are only a
                                                                                    
          few examples of a geminate consonant written in monomorphemic words, such as haccewwán2
                                                                                    
          ‘to forget’ (ww) and ekúnnak ‘just now.’ All other geminate consonants are the result of
                                                                                    
          assimilations across morpheme boundaries. Even though most geminate consonants were not
                                                                                    
          written, they almost certainly were pronounced.3                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         21                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Vowels. Atakapa vowels occur both short and long. In Gatschet’s manuscript and Swanton’s
                                                                                    
          publication, long vowels are marked with a macron, but all were not consistently written, eg,
                                                                                    
          ha·k ‘he, ergative’ (from /haʰik/) is written hak, while ha·š ‘as for him’ (from /haʰiš/) is written
                                                                                    
          hāc. If the majority of the recordings of a word have a long vowel, then the vowel here is written
                                                                                    
          long; a few long vowels have certainly been missed. Vowel clusters occur only across
                                                                                    
          morpheme boundaries; between the vowels occurs an ephemeral transitional sound, the quality
                                                                                    
          of which depends on the initial vowel. Thus, after a, a weak h is heard, after e and i, y, and after
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          o and u, w, for example huo ‘I hear,’ phonetically /huʷo/.                
                                                                                    
            Atakapa has five short vowels, but only four long vowels. The vowel u does not have a long
                                                                                    
          counterpart. This is due to historical reasons. Wherever comparative evidence from the eastern
                                                                                    
          dialect is available, every example of Yukhíti (Central4 Atakapa) u has a cognate in Hiyékiti
                                                                                    
          (Eastern Atakapa) with a different vowel. Note the following:             
                                                                                    
          Yukhíti        Hiyékiti                                                   
                                                                                    
          hu             hiw            ‘to see’                                    
                                                                                    
          ku             kiw            ‘egg’                                       
                                                                                    
          ilu            aliw           ‘be hot’                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          wulkol         wilkol         ‘raccoon’                                   
                                                                                    
          nikuc          nikict         ‘breast; nipple’                            
                                                                                    
          nešmuŋ         nišmi·n        ‘pine tree’                                 
                                                                                    
          tanuk          hanik          ‘one’                                       
                                                                                    
          tuc            tec            ‘leg’                                       
                                                                                    
          Orkokisak mostly agrees with Yukhíti in having u (O. tus ‘leg,’ Y. túc; H. tec), but occasionally
                                                                                    
          differs from both (O. oc ‘nose,’ Y. úc, H. ict] This evidence suggests that the vowel u is an
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         22                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          innovation in Yukhíti, after the conditions under which produced long vowels in an earlier state
                                                                                    
          of the language no longer were operative.                                 
                                                                                    
          Vowel length. Vowel length carries a low functional load in Atakapa. Long vowels are almost
                                                                                    
          exclusively restricted to final, accented syllables of words, and words with long vowels are of
                                                                                    
          low frequency. Nonetheless, Gatschet’s consultants insisted on the difference, and provided
                                                                                    
          several minimal pairs.5                                                   
                                                                                    
          Long Vowel                    Short Vowel                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          á·m            ‘to cook’      ám             ‘to drink’                   
                                                                                    
          cí·ci6         ‘tobacco pipe’ cíci           ‘baby’                       
                                                                                    
          é·ŋ            ‘name’         éŋ             ‘grease; fat’                
                                                                                    
          í·t            ‘face’         ít             ‘dung’                       
                                                                                    
          ká·k           ‘crow’         kák            ‘forest’                     
                                                                                    
          lá·k           ‘be strong’    lák            ‘sun’                        
                                                                                    
          ná·l           ‘be shallow’   nál            ‘to hunt’                    
                                                                                    
          né·            ‘land’         né             ‘to be ripe’                 
                                                                                    
          ó·             ‘rope’         ó              ‘at the edge of’             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          pá·c           ‘to squeeze’   pác            ‘to whip’                    
                                                                                    
          šé·š           ‘babies’       šéš            ‘mulberry; fig’              
                                                                                    
          Note that homonyms exist in words with both short and long vowels, for example káwš ‘to comb
                                                                                    
          something,’ káwš ‘to prick something;’ náw ‘shoe,’ náw ‘hair, fur, feathers,’ ní·t ‘five,’ ní·t
                                                                                    
          ‘thorn; honeylocust tree.’                                                
                                                                                    
          Syllabic nasals. Syllabic n is relatively common, occurring initially, medially, and finally.
                                                                                    
          Gatschet transcribed it as {‘n}, {ën}, {ěn}, and {n}. The occurrence is of this phoneme is most
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         23                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          common in morphemes, such as n̥- ‘second-person singular stative subject/active object,’=n̥
                                                                                    
          ‘noun connector,’ and –n̥t- ‘continuative.’ In monomorphemic words, syllabic n̥ occurs only
                                                                                    
          word-initially, usually before t, such as n̥tán ‘to be either/or;’ and n̥túl ‘river mouth, and word-
                                                                                    
          medially, išn̥cé·t ‘woman’s brother.’ In one monomorphemic word it occurs medially with the
                                                                                    
          only example of syllabic m̥ : {tó-u’ntáv’m} town̥táwm̥ hiy ‘sometimes’/tow.n̥.taβ.m̥ /.
                                                                                    
          Accent. Determining the nature of Atakapa accent is difficult, but necessary. First, the presence
                                                                                    
          or absence of accent distinguishes several words, elements, and constructions. Second, the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          phonetic feature of vowel weakening is dependent on the accent. Vowel weakening accounts for
                                                                                    
          much of the variation in the phonetically written forms of Atakapa words. The fact that phonetic
                                                                                    
          weakening of unaccented vowels takes place suggests that stress is a component of Atakapa
                                                                                    
          accent. An accent is written on most words in the corpus, even monosyllabic words, which
                                                                                    
          suggests that pitch is also a significant component of the accent. Examples such as [tsaˊxtaˊ]
                                                                                    
          ‘Choctaw’ where both syllables of a monomorphemic word bear an accent also suggest that
                                                                                    
          Atakapa accent also had a pitch component. Gatschet’s writing of the accent is fairly consistent,
                                                                                    
          but not always so. At times he underdifferentiates, not writing an accent when one should have
                                                                                    
          been written. Nonetheless, there are certain consistencies in cases where accent is not written,
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          suggesting that, at least in the case of noun phrases, accent was a property of the phrase, not the
                                                                                    
          word. Gatschet more often overdifferentiates, and writes an accent where one did not exist.
                                                                                    
          There are two morphemes that are habitually accented when other evidence suggests that they
                                                                                    
          were unaccented: the directional case suffix -ot, and the enclitic marking coordination of verb
                                                                                    
          phrases, =ya. In most cases, Gatschet treats -ot as if it were a postposition, but unlike true
                                                                                    
          postpositions, which are nouns, it cannot be verbalized, nor can it take other nominal cases.
                                                                                    
          Occasionally he does write it as part of the noun, for example [tuˊlut] ‘to the lake,’ showing the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         24                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          typical post-accentual vowel weakening, rather than the more frequent [tuˊl oˊt]. The enclitic
                                                                                    
          =ya he treats as if it were equivalent to German und or English ‘and’ and writes it as a separate,
                                                                                    
          accented word whenever he recognizes it. However, in the cases that he does not recognize it, he
                                                                                    
          writes it, unaccented, as part of the previous word:7                     
                                                                                    
               [icak taˊ-ic oˊkiăn yukitnē mon ialpeˊhiulĕt]                        
                                                                                    
          1)   iša·k táyš ókya yukit né· mo·n yálpéhiulat                           
                                                                                    
               iša·k     tayš      ok=ya     yukit ne· mo·n                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               person    strange   come=and  our  land all                          
                                                                                    
               yal-peh-i-ul-at                                                      
                                                                                    
               take-finish-CAUS-3PLS-PRET                                           
                                                                                    
               ‘Strange people have come and completely taken all of our land.’ (1932:88:1)
                                                                                    
          At times, instead of, or in addition to, an accent Gatschet writes a long vowel, even if the vowel
                                                                                    
          is not organically long. This strongly suggests that he was hearing pitch, rather than stress. An
                                                                                    
          example is [ok hūˊya] ‘he came to see him, and…’ where a long u is written, even though long u
                                                                                    
          is not a phoneme of Atakapa. An additional complication is that when Swanton published
                                                                                    
          Gatschet’s material, he occasionally added accents that were not in the field notes, and
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          occasionally omitted some that were.                                      
                                                                                    
           Accent distinguishes several elements, for example há ‘he,’ versus ha ‘his;’ ók ‘to come,’ ok-
                                                                                    
          ‘come and do.’ It also has syntactic use in distinguishing verb phrases from adjectival phrases:
                                                                                    
          išá·k káw ‘a man is dead,’ and iša·k káw ‘a dead man.’ There is at least one case where accent
                                                                                    
          placement distinguishes words: ití ‘night’ versus íti ‘front.’ Therefore, even though determining
                                                                                    
          accent can be problematic, it is necessary for the proper understanding of the language.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         25                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Pitch levels. Assuming that Atakapa accent has a pitch component, one can postulate two
                                                                                    
          primary pitch levels, high, which Gatschet marked with an accent, and mid, which remains
                                                                                    
          unmarked. In addition, there are traces of a low pitch accent. The low accent can be identified
                                                                                    
          when Gatschet does not write an accent on the syllable on which it should occur, but rather
                                                                                    
          writes accents on the surrounding syllables, which are usually never accented. The following are
                                                                                    
          a few identified examples. Examples 4-7 suggest that low pitch indicates that a noun is
                                                                                    
          verbalized.                                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [uctiˊkit]                                                           
                                                                                    
          2)   ùštikit                                                              
                                                                                    
               ø-uš-tikit                                                           
                                                                                    
               3STATS-be.so-FUT                                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘It will be so.’ (1932:139:2)                                        
                                                                                    
               [hikuˊ wi nuˊk tik iˊka koˊ]                                         
                                                                                    
          3)   hikú wi núk tikhikàkóh                                               
                                                                                    
               hiku wi   nuk  tik-hi-ka-koh                                         
                                                                                    
               soup I    self go.and-1SSTATS-make-DESID                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I myself want to go and make soup.’ (1932:41:1)                     
                                                                                    
               [na ˊ-ic ĕncoˊkoi]                                                   
                                                                                    
          4)   náiš n̥šokòy                                                         
                                                                                    
               na-iš     n̥-šokòy                                                   
                                                                                    
               you(sg)-FOC 2STATS-be.chief                                          
                                                                                    
               ‘You are a chief.’ (1932:83:1)                                       
                                                                                    
               [hāc coˊko-i]                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         26                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          5)   há·š šokòy                                                           
                                                                                    
               ha-iš     ø-šokòy                                                    
                                                                                    
               he-foc    3STATS-be.chief                                            
                                                                                    
               ‘He is a chief.’ (1932:69:1)                                         
                                                                                    
               [hikīˊke iˊcak]                                                      
                                                                                    
          6)   hikí·ke išà·k                                                        
                                                                                    
               hiki-ike  ø-išà·k                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               west-EL   3STATS-be.person                                           
                                                                                    
               ‘He is a man from the west.’ (1932:40:2)                             
                                                                                    
               [Taˊkapo kic yukiˊti nuˊnkin kēˊt’ntat]                              
                                                                                    
          7)   tákapa kìš yukhíti núŋkin ké·tn̥ tat                                 
                                                                                    
               takapa    ø-kìš          yukhiti   nuŋ-kin   ke·t-n̥ ta-t            
                                                                                    
               Atakapa   3STATS-be.woman Indian   village-LOC dwell-CONTIN-PRET     
                                                                                    
               ‘She was an Atakapa woman, and she used to live in an Indian village.’ (1932:14:70-1)
                                                                                    
          In the Muskogean languages of the Southeast, for example Creek (Haas, 1940), pitch has an
                                                                                    
          aspectual function in the verbal system, and the probable cases of Atakapa low pitch accent also
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          occur on verbs, which suggests an aspectual function as well. It seems fairly clear that the low
                                                                                    
          pitch accent is frequent on nouns that are verbalized in equational sentences.
                                                                                    
          Verbal accentuation. The accent in verbs is absolutely regular, which suggests that accent is a
                                                                                    
          lexical feature of verb roots. For accentual purposes, the verb root is CV(·)C. Syllables
                                                                                    
          preceding the root are not considered for accentual purposes, nor are the derivational suffixes -i
                                                                                    
          and -iš. Roots beginning or ending in a vowel are treated as if there were an initial or final
                                                                                    
          consonant, which historically was a glottal stop, which seems no longer to have been phonemic
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         27                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          in the language when it was recorded. The various modal suffixes, even if they are of the form
                                                                                    
          CVC, are never accented.                                                  
                                                                                    
               [viˊvulat]                                                           
                                                                                    
          8)   wíwulat                                                              
                                                                                    
               wíw-ul-at                                                            
                                                                                    
               believe-3PLS-PRET                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘They believed it.’ (1932:18:121)                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [ok-inaˊtsûlat]                                                      
                                                                                    
          9)   hokináculat                                                          
                                                                                    
               hok-inác-ul-at                                                       
                                                                                    
               RECIP-fight-3PLS-PRET                                                
                                                                                    
               ‘They fought each other.’ (1932:20:144)                              
                                                                                    
               [laˊwi-ulat]                                                         
                                                                                    
          10)  láwiulat                                                             
                                                                                    
               láw-i-ul-at                                                          
                                                                                    
               burn-CAUS-3PLS-PRET                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘They burned it.’ (1932:19:138)                                      
                                                                                    
               [wineˊ-ulat]                                                         
                                                                                    
          11)  winéulat                                                             
                                                                                    
               winé-ul-at                                                           
                                                                                    
               find-3PLS-PRET                                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘They found her.’ (1932:10:29)                                       
                                                                                    
               [oˊtikit]                                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         28                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          12)  ótikit                                                               
                                                                                    
               ø-ó-tikit                                                            
                                                                                    
               3STATS-be.located.there-FUT                                          
                                                                                    
               ‘It will be located there.’ (1932:28:1)                              
                                                                                    
               [icyāˊmcĕhĕ]                                                         
                                                                                    
          13)  išyá·mšehe                                                           
                                                                                    
               iš-yá·mš-ehe                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               1PLSTATS-gather-DUB                                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘We might gather it.’ (1932:13:49)                                   
                                                                                    
          Verbs ending in -u, which historically ended in -iw, are accented on that vowel.
                                                                                    
               [huˊ-ulat]                                                           
                                                                                    
          14)  húulat < *híwulat                                                    
                                                                                    
               hu-ul-at                                                             
                                                                                    
               see-3PLS-PRET                                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘They saw it.’ (1932:11:33)                                          
                                                                                    
               [iluˊ]                                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          15)  ilú < *ilíw                                                          
                                                                                    
               ø-ilú                                                                
                                                                                    
               3STATS-be.hot                                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘It is hot.’ (1932:47:2)                                             
                                                                                    
          The negative affix -háh(š), and the aspectual affixes which are the form CVC, also bear an
                                                                                    
          accent.                                                                   
                                                                                    
               [icpaˊts haˊhat]                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         29                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          16)  išpácháhat                                                           
                                                                                    
               iš-pác-háh-at                                                        
                                                                                    
               1PLO-beat-NEG-PRET                                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘He did not beat us.’ (1932:16:103)                                  
                                                                                    
               [kaˊ-u haˊnĕt]                                                       
                                                                                    
          17)  káwhánat                                                             
                                                                                    
               ø-káw-hán-at                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               3STATS-die(sg)-ALMOST-PRET                                           
                                                                                    
               ‘She almost died.’ (1932:13:55)                                      
                                                                                    
               [cukaˊhāˊñctin]                                                      
                                                                                    
          18)  šoká·kháŋštin                                                        
                                                                                    
               šoká·k-háŋš-ti-n                                                     
                                                                                    
               ceremonial.dance-FINISH-PST.PROG-WHEN                                
                                                                                    
               ‘When they had finished the ceremonial dance…’ (1932:18:124-25)      
                                                                                    
          Nominal accentuation. In contrast to verbal accentuation, which is regular and predictable,
                                                                                    
          accentuation of nouns and pronouns is much more complex. Accent seems to be a feature of the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          noun phrase, and is not lexically determined. Thus, a noun root is accented when followed by
                                                                                    
          case suffixes, but is unaccented if followed by an adjective in a noun phrase; in that case, the
                                                                                    
          adjectival root is accented. Pronouns acting as subjects of verbs are accented; singular pronouns
                                                                                    
          acting as possessors are not. All this is made more complicated as occasionally Gatschet seems
                                                                                    
          to have written the accent he expected to hear, not the one that actually was spoken. There seem
                                                                                    
          also to be other, less definable, conditioning factors for nominal accentuation.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         30                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            The accentuation of root nouns in isolation depends on the shape and weight of the nominal
                                                                                    
          root. Atakapa root nouns, as a general rule, occur in the following syllable shapes: CV(·)C,
                                                                                    
          CVCV(·)C, CVCCV(·)C, CVCC, and CVCV. Light syllables are of the form CV; heavy
                                                                                    
          syllables are of the form CVC or CV·. Nouns are accented on the final heavy syllable of a root.
                                                                                    
          The few nouns of the form CVCV are accented on the final light syllable. Note that long vowels
                                                                                    
          do not occur in initial syllables of monomorphemic polysyllabic nouns. Nouns of the form V,
                                                                                    
          CV, and VC seem to have lost an initial or final glottal stop, which is written in the following
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          examples to illustrate the original syllable shape of the words in which it occurred.
                                                                                    
          CV(·)C roots                                                              
                                                                                    
          kíš       ‘woman’                                                         
                                                                                    
          téy       ‘vine’                                                          
                                                                                    
          má·l      ‘thigh’                                                         
                                                                                    
          ká·k      ‘raven’                                                         
                                                                                    
          né·       ‘land’                                                          
                                                                                    
          ó·        rope < *ʔo·                                                     
                                                                                    
          á         ‘this’ <*ʔáʔ                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          áy        ‘marsh’ <*ʔáy                                                   
                                                                                    
          CVCV(·)C root                                                             
                                                                                    
          canúk     ‘horse’                                                         
                                                                                    
          hiláy     ‘wife’                                                          
                                                                                    
          hišán     ‘mother-in-law’                                                 
                                                                                    
          kicá·k    ‘whiskey’                                                       
                                                                                    
          ité·t     ‘father’ <*ʔité·t                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         31                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ehéw      ‘sweetgum tree’ <*ʔehéw                                         
                                                                                    
          CVCCVC                                                                    
                                                                                    
          wolšél    ‘great horned owl’                                              
                                                                                    
          kamcíš    ‘dragonfly’                                                     
                                                                                    
          kulšá     ‘grandfather’ <*kulšáʔ                                          
                                                                                    
          CVCC                                                                      
                                                                                    
          cíšt      ‘pipe’                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          láns      ‘deer’                                                          
                                                                                    
          náhc      ‘turtle’                                                        
                                                                                    
          íck       ‘chest and stomach’ <*ʔick                                      
                                                                                    
          ášk       ‘shadow’ <*ʔášk                                                 
                                                                                    
          CVCV                                                                      
                                                                                    
          nilá      ‘grandmother’                                                   
                                                                                    
          hipá      ‘husband’                                                       
                                                                                    
          kató      ‘lip’                                                           
                                                                                    
          hikí      ‘west’                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          inó       ‘side’ <*ʔinó                                                   
                                                                                    
          iné       ‘wax myrtle’ <*ʔiné                                             
                                                                                    
          A number of kin terms have unusual root shapes; however, their accentuation is regular:
                                                                                    
          iškišíl   ‘daughter’                                                      
                                                                                    
          iškišé·t  ‘sister of a man’                                               
                                                                                    
          išn̥cé·t  ‘brother of a woman’                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         32                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Unexpected accentuation. The recorded accentuation of the following nouns does not follow
                                                                                    
          the regular patterns. They all are hapax legomena, and all have the accent occurring on the
                                                                                    
          initial syllable.                                                         
                                                                                    
          tópišt    ‘oak’                                                           
                                                                                    
          tókicit   ‘grasshopper’                                                   
                                                                                    
          témokš    ‘brant’                                                         
                                                                                    
          témom     ‘ashes’                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          cíkip     ‘little blue heron’                                             
                                                                                    
          máke·c    ‘lizard’                                                        
                                                                                    
          It is possible that this pattern is not one in which the initial syllable is accented, but that it is
                                                                                    
          higher in pitch than the final syllable, which would then have the low pitch accent, and the
                                                                                    
          elicited form would be a verbalization, thus makè·c ‘it is a lizard,’ topìšt ‘it is an oak,’ and so
                                                                                    
          forth (c.f. example 4, above), given that there is no formal distinction in Atakapa between
                                                                                    
          nominal and verbal roots.                                                 
                                                                                    
          Phonetic processes. There are four phonetic processes that affect the orthography of the lexical
                                                                                    
          items in Gatschet’s field notes and as published in Gatschet and Swanton: vowel weakening,
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          aspiration, preaspiration, and h-stopping. These are sub-phonemic processes which account for
                                                                                    
          the majority of the attested variation in the corpus.                     
                                                                                    
          Vowel Weakening. The short vowels a, e, i, and u in syllables that fall before or after an
                                                                                    
          accented vowel can be weakened to schwa; the vowel o is weakened to ʌ. This is indicated in the
                                                                                    
          corpus by variation in the phonetic transcription of a weakened vowel, as in the following
                                                                                    
          examples.                                                                 
                                                                                    
          Post-accentual weakening                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         33                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Taˊkapo icāˊk hatwiˊvat]                                            
                                                                                    
               /tákapǝ išá·k hatwíβat]                                              
                                                                                    
          19)  tákapa išá·k hatwíwat                                                
                                                                                    
               takapa    iša·k     hat-wiw-at                                       
                                                                                    
               Atakapa   people    REFLEX-believe-PRET                              
                                                                                    
               ‘The Atakapa people believed it.’ (1932:17:112-13)                   
                                                                                    
               [tuˊl taˊyut iyeˊ kaˊc]                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               /túl táyʌt iyékaš/                                                   
                                                                                    
          20)  túl táyot iyékaš                                                     
                                                                                    
               tul  tay-ot    ø-iye-kaš                                             
                                                                                    
               lake river-DIR 3STATS-be.more-be.deep                                
                                                                                    
               ‘The lake is deeper than the river.’ (1932:125:1)                    
                                                                                    
          Pre-accentual weakening                                                   
                                                                                    
               [cokcukyiˊkc yaˊ cukwaˊk ‘n āˊl pai-oˊk yaˊ]                         
                                                                                    
               /šokšəkyíkšya šʌkwákn a·l payókya …/                                 
                                                                                    
          21)  šokšakyíkšya šokwákn a·l payókya …                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               šokšakyikš=ya  šokwak=n  a·l  payok=ya                               
                                                                                    
               sell=and       bread=and meat bring.back=and                         
                                                                                    
               ‘She sells, and brings back bread and meat, and…’ (1932:15:75-76)    
                                                                                    
          Both pre-and post-accentual weakening                                     
                                                                                    
               [Tawatweˊnăt Utsutaˊt ut.]                                           
                                                                                    
               /tawwatwénat ʌcʌttá·tʌt/                                             
                                                                                    
          22)  tawwatwénat ocottá·tot                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         34                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               taw-hat-wen-ø-at    oc-ot-ta·t-ot                                    
                                                                                    
               stand-REFLEX-pray-3SS-PRET above-DIR-stand-DIR                       
                                                                                    
               ‘They stood and prayed to God (She-who-stands-above).’ (1932:9:14)   
                                                                                    
          Aspiration. All the stop consonants apparently were fortis and aspirated; in taking dictation,
                                                                                    
          Gatschet occasionally recorded the non-phonemic aspiration of t and k as if they were phonetic
                                                                                    
          parts of the word, for example antú ‘owl’ recorded as [ant’huˊ], itáŋ ‘where,’ recorded as
                                                                                    
          [it’haˊñ], and eykún ‘now,’ recorded as [ik’huˊn]. There are, however, a few words where /kh/
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          occurs at an old /k-k/ morpheme boundary, such as ikhawc ‘to drown,’ *hik- ‘action in water,’
                                                                                    
          káw ‘to die,’ and yukhíti ‘Indian; Atakapa,’ cf. Hiyékiti yok ‘we’ and –kiti ‘*tribe,’ the latter
                                                                                    
          found in hiyé-kiti ‘Eastern Atakapa,’ lit. ‘Sunrise Tribe,’ iyé-c ‘to rise, of the sun.’
                                                                                    
          Pre-aspiration. A notable feature of the texts dictated by Tottokš is the occasional strong pre-
                                                                                    
          aspiration of nasal n, and stops, especially k, after the vowels a and o, which does not occur in
                                                                                    
          the speech of Kišyuc.                                                     
                                                                                    
               [cox̥koˊ-i] [coˊx̥ kiti] (1932:9:10)                                 
                                                                                    
          T:   /šoxkóy/  /šoxkìti/                                                  
                                                                                    
               [cokoˊ-i] [cokiˊti] (1932:9:10)                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          K:   /šokóy/8  /šokíti/                                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘chief’   ‘headman’                                                  
                                                                                    
          The preaspiration is so strong that occasionally the stop was not recorded.
                                                                                    
               [coxtoˊl]                                                            
                                                                                    
               /šok-tól/                                                            
                                                                                    
               thing-good                                                           
                                                                                    
               ‘good luck’ (1932:13:52)                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         35                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Kaufman (2014:75) suggests that orthographic /xk/ represents the consonant cluster /kk/. While
                                                                                    
          this is a plausible suggestion, given that the orthography /xC/ sometimes does indicate a /kC/
                                                                                    
          cluster, as in /cox̥ mōˊn/ for /šokmó·n/ ‘property,’ elsewhere, where /kk/ clusters occur across
                                                                                    
          morpheme boundaries, they are written simply as /k/ or carefully as /k’k/:
                                                                                    
               [cakaˊu koˊ-i]                                                       
                                                                                    
          23)  šakkáw kóy                                                           
                                                                                    
               šak-kaw        koy                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               PL-be.dead     language                                              
                                                                                    
               ‘The language of the dead, i.e. white people.’ (1932:68:2)           
                                                                                    
               [ta-ucok’koˊ-ikit]                                                   
                                                                                    
          24)  tawšokkóykit                                                         
                                                                                    
               taw-šok-ø-koy-kit                                                    
                                                                                    
               STAND-STH-3STATS-say-PROG                                            
                                                                                    
               ‘He is standing and saying things, i.e. he is preaching.’ (1932:69:1)
                                                                                    
          This feature seems to be the result of the extremely slow speech required to dictate texts, and the
                                                                                    
          attempt to articulate the words clearly for Gatschet.                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          H-stopping. Just as preaspiration is a feature of the speech of Tottokš; h-stopping is a feature of
                                                                                    
          the speech of Kišyuc. H-stopping causes intervocalic h to surface as k, for example [yaˊko] ‘I eat
                                                                                    
          it’ for yáho. H-stopping is much rarer in texts than in individual elicited items, so it seems that it
                                                                                    
          is an artifact of unnaturally slow speech on the part of Kišyuc.          
                                                                                    
          Lack of orthographic h. At times, initial, medial, and final h are not written in the field notes.
                                                                                    
          Initial h is not written primarily before a, i, and o, thus [at-] for hat-, ‘reflexive,’ [i-] for hi- first-
                                                                                    
          person singular object/stative subject, and [ok-] for hok- ‘reciprocal. Medial h is usually
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         36                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          represented by a hyphen; only variations in spelling show that the h is present, [o-inaˊka] /
                                                                                    
          [ahenaˊka] ahinákka ‘how.’ Final h often can be recovered only when a word ending in h is
                                                                                    
          followed by suffixes, [yukiˊt iccukiáˊ-ikoˊ] / [hin cokiaˊx koˊxca] yukít iššokyáhkóh ‘we want to
                                                                                    
          eat’/ nšokyáhkóhš á ‘do you want to eat?’                                 
                                                                                    
          Variable initial h. At other times a vowel-initial word is recorded with an initial h; primarily
                                                                                    
          words beginning in i, but also beginning in o. It is possible that some of these words do have an
                                                                                    
          initial h, only in that most of the recordings lack it. Two words that are recorded with initial h
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          which almost certainly lack it are ité·t ‘father,’ and oké·t ‘mother.’ Many kin terms begin with h,
                                                                                    
          such as hišán ‘mother-in-law,’ hišile·t ‘younger sister of a woman,’ hiláy ‘wife,’ hipá ‘husband,’
                                                                                    
          and hiyó·l ‘son;’ thus the occasional initial h is based on the pattern of the other kin terms.9
                                                                                    
          The status of orthographic x. The possibility of there being two glottal fricatives, h and x
                                                                                    
          must be explored. Swanton’s characters [x] and [x̥] are his retranscriptions of Gatschet’s {q},
                                                                                    
          {’h} and {χ}. The sequence Gatschet writes {’h} however, is only retranscribed as [x] before a
                                                                                    
          consonant, it is left [’h] after a vowel. There are very few examples of [x] in the corpus. It never
                                                                                    
          occurs word initially, or medially between two vowels. It occurs occasionally as a careful
                                                                                    
          articulation of word-final h, and as the pronunciation of h before a stop consonant, nasal, or
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          fricative, and in the phonetic process of pre-aspiration. There are no words that are differentiated
                                                                                    
          by the contrast of h and x (compare vowel length). Thus, we can deduce that there is only one
                                                                                    
          glottal fricative, h.                                                     
                                                                                    
          Active phonological processes. There are two primary phonological processes operating in
                                                                                    
          Atakapa. The first is consonant assimilation and the second is vowel coalescence.
                                                                                    
          Consonant assimilation. When a consonant cluster forms (or historically formed) across a
                                                                                    
          morpheme boundary, the two consonants can assimilate. The double consonant thus formed is
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         37                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          almost never shown in writing, but variations in orthography show its presence. Note that none
                                                                                    
          of these assimilations are obligatory.                                    
                                                                                    
          šh > šš   iš-hat-cíškiš-at >  iššaccíškišat  ‘we were glad’               
                                                                                    
          nh > nn   tan-héw        >    tannéw         ‘others’                     
                                                                                    
          wh > ww   taw-hat-wén-at >    tawwatwénat    ‘they stood and prayed’      
                                                                                    
          yh > yy   kuy-hat-kól    >    kuyyatkól      ‘sausage’                    
                                                                                    
          ln > ll   líl-nak-líl    >    líllaklíl      ‘very soft’                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ln̥ > nn  pay-ók-cel-n̥  >    payókcenn      ‘when we return’             
                                                                                    
          ŋm > mm   máŋ-maŋ        >    mámmaŋ         ‘long (pl)’                  
                                                                                    
          ŋn > nn   nuŋ-núl        >    nunnúl         ‘dwell in a village’         
                                                                                    
          pk > kk   kóp-kop        >    kókkop         ‘white (pl)’                 
                                                                                    
          tk > kk   šokatkéŋiš     >    šokakkéŋiš     ‘blackberry’                 
                                                                                    
          tc > cc   hi-hat-cewwán-at >  hihaccewwánat  ‘I forgot it’                
                                                                                    
          kp > pp   nak-pémst á    >    nappémst á     ‘are you (pl) tired?’        
                                                                                    
          kt > tt   hiyik-tá·to    >    hiyittá·to     ‘I stand up’                 
                                                                                    
          kc > cc   pakcalšópš     >    paccalšópš;    ‘squirrel’                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kƛ > ƛƛ   ƛáw-nak-ƛáw    >    ƛáwnaƛƛáw      ‘very light’                 
                                                                                    
          ky >kk    šok-šak-yíkš-kit >  šokšakkíkškit  ‘he is selling’              
                                                                                    
          Vowel coalescence. When a cluster of two vowels is formed by any morphological process, the
                                                                                    
          two vowels may coalesce into a single long vowel. In addition, sequences of VhV may
                                                                                    
          optionally coalesce into a long vowel.                                    
                                                                                    
          há-iš > há·š        ‘he/she (focus)’                                      
                                                                                    
          wí-ik > wí·k        ‘I (ergative)’                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         38                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          né·-ip > né·p       ‘in the land’                                         
                                                                                    
          né-ot > ne·t        ‘downwards’                                           
                                                                                    
          póhip > pó·p        ‘by means of smoke’                                   
                                                                                    
          háhan > há·n        ‘not existing’                                        
                                                                                    
          wéhet > wé·t        ‘me (directional)’                                    
                                                                                    
          hilóhišne > hiló·šne ‘to help me’                                         
                                                                                    
          Vowel coalescence explains certain cases of vowel length in Central Atakapa, for example ká·k
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ‘crow; raven’ Eastern kahak.                                              
                                                                                    
          Allophonic variation. The semi-vowel w can have the voiced bilabial fricative allophone /β/ in
                                                                                    
          initial or medial position; this is written [v] in Gatschet’s notes and the publication; in syllable
                                                                                    
          final position, it has the allophone /φ/, which is written [f]. The nasal consonants n and ŋ are
                                                                                    
          neutralized before k; both nk and ŋk are written [nk]. The nasals m, n, and ŋ are often weakened
                                                                                    
          to vowel nasalization word-finally; this has resulted in variation in citation forms for a few
                                                                                    
          words, such as šokóm / šokón / šokóŋ ‘cow.’                               
                                                                                    
          Initial syllable syncope. Very rarely, polysyllabic words beginning with the syllable šVk- will
                                                                                    
          be syncoped to š.                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Full form      Syncoped form       Meaning                                
                                                                                    
          šaktálko       štálko              ‘Skin-desirer’                         
                                                                                    
          šoknáyke       šnáyke              ‘Duck-owner’                           
                                                                                    
          This syncope is probably the origin of the words škóp ‘dipper,’ and škalškáš ‘to be crazy,’ as
                                                                                    
          initial consonant clusters do not otherwise occur in native Atakapa words.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Notes                                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         39                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          1 . Morris Swadesh phonemicized the Atakapa forms from the 1932 publication for his paper on
                                                                                    
          comparing Atakapa to Chitimacha (1946b:115). His phonemicization is very similar to that used
                                                                                    
          here, except that he ignored accent, vowel length, and gemination. Karl-Heinz Gursky (1969:86)
                                                                                    
          used Swadesh’s system, again ignoring accent, vowel length, and gemination, with two
                                                                                    
          additional modifications: he decided to replace ŋ with the cluster nk, and treated all u vowels as
                                                                                    
          if they were o. Neither Swadesh nor Gursky referred to Gatschet’s original field notes. Mary R.
                                                                                    
          Haas (1958:241) developed another phonemicization with the proviso that there were long
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          vowels which she did not write. Pamela Munro used Haas’s system (1994:215) in quoting
                                                                                    
          Atakapa forms in her comparative study of Yuki-Gulf.                      
                                                                                    
          2 . The initial geminate consonant comes from the assimilation of the prefix hat- to the initial
                                                                                    
          consonant of cewwán)                                                      
                                                                                    
          3 . On very rare occasions Gatschet wrote these geminate consonants, for example on page 18 of
                                                                                    
          his field notes (1885b) he wrote {mámang} for the plural of máŋ ‘long,’ and later corrected it to
                                                                                    
          {mámmang} mámmaŋ, the assimilated form of máŋmaŋ.                         
                                                                                    
          4 . Swanton calls the language Gatschet recorded Western Atakapa. However, since there is a
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          recorded Atakapan language to the west, Orkokisak (Swanton’s Akokisa), one can with better
                                                                                    
          justification call Yukhíti Central Atakapa.                               
                                                                                    
          5 . This begins on the very first page of the field notes, where Kišyuc insists on the distinction
                                                                                    
          between šakyól ‘male’ and išá·k yó·l ‘ill-tempered man.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:3).
                                                                                    
          6 . This word seems to be an allegro form of the compound cít ‘tobacco,’ and cišt ‘pipe.’ Given
                                                                                    
          that Gatschet rarely writes geminate consonants, this form may in fact be cícci, without a long
                                                                                    
          vowel at all.                                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         40                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          7 There are examples in Gatschet’s field notes where he scratches out affixed, unstressed =ya,
                                                                                    
          and replaces it with a stressed independent word yá.                      
                                                                                    
          8 . Swanton (1932:69) derives šokóy from šok ‘thing’ and kóy ‘speak,’ thus ‘sayer of things,’
                                                                                    
          and this etymology has been followed by later writers. However the word is never written
                                                                                    
          *[cok’ko-i] but only as [coko-i] or [cox̥ ko-i], the last form showing the preaspiration of k that
                                                                                    
          occurs in the writing of the true compound šok-íti ‘headman’ [cox̥ kiti]. The syllable canon of
                                                                                    
          šokóy, CVCVC, fits that of a monomorphemic word in Atakapa, and in all adjoining languages the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          word for ‘chief’ is monomorphemic.                                        
                                                                                    
          9 . Kin terms show other traces of being reshaped after each other. Many kin-terms end in the
                                                                                    
          sequence -e·t, so in addition to ‘father,’ ‘mother,’ and ‘younger sister of a woman,’ we have
                                                                                    
          kelé·t ‘aunt,’ isn̥cé·t ‘brother of a woman,’ išiwé·t ‘elder sister of a woman,’ wé·t ‘sister/female
                                                                                    
          cousin.’ n̥cé·t ‘brother of a man, (?)’ and iškišé·t ‘sister of a man.’   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         41                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          2. THE VERB AND VERBAL MORPHOLOGY                                         
                                                                                    
           The Atakapa verb has some unique features in comparison with the verbal systems of other
                                                                                    
          Southeastern languages. The verb in the aorist mode is inflected in the first person singular, and
                                                                                    
          in the first, second, and third persons plural by suffixes; in the second- and third-person singular
                                                                                    
          the verb is unmarked, and inflected using independent pronouns. There is a second set of person
                                                                                    
          markers for all persons but the third-person singular which are prefixes, and which indicate
                                                                                    
          direct and indirect objects. These same object prefixes are used to indicate the subjects of verbs
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          of state or emotion, stative verbs, such as occur in all attested Southeastern languages, also
                                                                                    
          termed a split-s system. What is unique about the Atakapa verbal system is that the stative
                                                                                    
          prefixes are used to mark the subjects of active verbs when the verb is inflected for the preterite,
                                                                                    
          dubitative, definite future, progressive, and subordinate modes.          
                                                                                    
          The aorist mode. This mode is used to describe actions in the present, as well as the past and
                                                                                    
          the future if there is no emphasis on the temporal nature of the action. The following is a chart
                                                                                    
          of the inflectional forms for the aorist, with the inflection of the verb ám ‘to drink’ (1932:25:2):
                                                                                    
          1s        ROOT-o    ám-o      ‘I drink it’                                
                                                                                    
          2s   na   ROOT-ø    na ám     ‘you (sg) drink it’                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          3s   ha   ROOT-ø    ha ám     ‘he/she drinks it’                          
                                                                                    
          1pl       ROOT-cel  ám-cel    ‘we drink it’                               
                                                                                    
          2pl       ROOT-tem  ám-tem    ‘you (pl) drink it’                         
                                                                                    
          3pl       ROOT-ul   *ám-ul    ‘they drink it’1                            
                                                                                    
          2simp     ROOT-ø    ám        ‘drink it!’    (1932:26:1)                  
                                                                                    
          1plimp    ROOT-lu   ám-lu     ‘let us drink it!’                          
                                                                                    
          2plimp    ROOT-to   ám-to     ‘drink it, you all!’                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         42                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          First person singular                                                     
                                                                                    
               [aˊñ-idsōˊn otōˊlco ‘nkēˊtne yukiˊt aˊnkin]                          
                                                                                    
          25)  aŋicón itólšo n̥ké·tne yukít áŋkin                                   
                                                                                    
               aŋicon    itolš-o   n̥-ke·t-ne          yukit aŋ-kin                 
                                                                                    
               room      prepare-1SS 2SSTATS-stay-GER  our  house-LOC               
                                                                                    
               ‘I have prepared a room for you to stay in at our house.’ (1932:12:42-43)
                                                                                    
          Second person singular:                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [naˊ teˊm ǎˊm]                                                       
                                                                                    
          26)  ná tém ám                                                            
                                                                                    
               na        tem       am-ø                                             
                                                                                    
               you(sg)   yesterday drink-2/3SS                                      
                                                                                    
               ‘You drank yesterday.’ (1932:83:1)                                   
                                                                                    
          Third person singular:                                                    
                                                                                    
               [haˊ yaˊx]                                                           
                                                                                    
          27)  há yáh                                                               
                                                                                    
               ha   yáh-ø                                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               s/he eat-2/3SS                                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘He eats it.’ (1932:32:2)                                            
                                                                                    
          First person plural:                                                      
                                                                                    
               [Yukiˊt noˊmcsĕm tuhtsĕl yukiˊt nuk]                                 
                                                                                    
          28)  yukít nómšsim túhcel yukít nuk                                       
                                                                                    
               yukit nomš-šim      tuh-cel        yukit nuk                         
                                                                                    
               we   child-NOTHING.BUT stay(pl)-1PLS we alone                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         43                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘It was nothing but us children; we stayed there all by ourselves.’ (1932:17:107-08)
                                                                                    
          Second person plural:                                                     
                                                                                    
               [naˊkīt oˊktěm makeˊne]                                              
                                                                                    
          29)  nakìt óktem makene                                                   
                                                                                    
               nakit     ok-tem    make-ne                                          
                                                                                    
               you(pl)   come-2PLS trade-GER                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘You all come in order to trade.’ (1932:79:1)                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Third person plural:                                                      
                                                                                    
               [icāk heˊ-u kiˊwilc ipcoˊx̥ kuˊl]                                    
                                                                                    
          30)  iša·khéw kíwilš ipšókul                                              
                                                                                    
               iša·k-hew kiwilš    ipšok-ul                                         
                                                                                    
               person-PL white.person be.doctor-3PLS                                
                                                                                    
               ‘The men are European doctors.’ (1932:67:2)                          
                                                                                    
          Hortative and Imperative. There are special forms only for the first person plural hortative (-
                                                                                    
          lo) and the second person plural imperative (-to). The second person singular is usually the bare
                                                                                    
          stem of the verb, although there is an occasional suffix -n̥ , which is found more frequently with
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          negative imperatives (see the section below on negation). First person singular and third person
                                                                                    
          imperatives are handled using a double-verb construction with the verb nawš ‘to let; permit.’ The
                                                                                    
          following are examples:                                                   
                                                                                    
               [Oˊk, ichuˊ]                                                         
                                                                                    
          31)  ók išhú                                                              
                                                                                    
               ok-ø      iš-hu-ø                                                    
                                                                                    
               come-2SIMP 1PLO-see-2SIMP                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         44                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘Come! See us!’ (1932:14:68)                                         
                                                                                    
               [cakwaˊntsěn]                                                        
                                                                                    
          32)  šakwáncn̥                                                            
                                                                                    
               šak-wanc-n̥                                                          
                                                                                    
               3PLO-say-2SIMP                                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘Tell it to them!’ (1932:143:1)                                      
                                                                                    
               [mon hoˊktiˊwe puˊmlo]                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          33)  mo·n hoktiwé·púmlo                                                   
                                                                                    
               mo·n hok-tiwe·-pum-lo                                                
                                                                                    
               all  RECIP-be.together-dance-1PLIMP                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘Let us all dance together!” (1932:107:1)                            
                                                                                    
               [yukiˊt tiuoˊ-ilo]                                                   
                                                                                    
          34)  yukít tiwóylo                                                        
                                                                                    
               yukit tiw-oy-lo                                                      
                                                                                    
               we   GO(PL)-sleep-1PLIMP                                             
                                                                                    
               ‘Let us go and sleep!’ (1932:96:1)                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [yukiˊt aˊñ ot tūˊkto]                                               
                                                                                    
          35)  yukít áŋot túkto                                                     
                                                                                    
               yukit aŋ-ot    tuk-to                                                
                                                                                    
               our  house-DIR bring-2PLIMP                                          
                                                                                    
               ‘Bring it to our house, you all!’ (1932:136:2)                       
                                                                                    
               [hoktewē to]                                                         
                                                                                    
          36)  hoktiwé·to                                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         45                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               hok-tiwé·-to                                                         
                                                                                    
               RECIP-be.together-2PLIMP                                             
                                                                                    
               ‘Be together with one another, you all!’ (1932:133:2)                
                                                                                    
          Object/Patient prefixes. There are distinct prefixes used to reference pronoun objects on the
                                                                                    
          verb. Depending on the semantics of the verb they will refer to direct objects or
                                                                                    
          dative/benefactive objects. If there is a chance of ambiguity, the dative/benefactive object is
                                                                                    
          cross-referenced by a noun phrase in the directional case. In addition, these prefixes are used to
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          mark the subjects of stative verbs in the aorist mode, and the subjects of all verbs in the other
                                                                                    
          modes. This reflects the basic split-s nature of Atakapa grammar (after Dixon, 1994:71-72).
                                                                                    
          1s   hi-            1pl  iš-                                              
                                                                                    
          2s`  n̥-            2pl  nak-                                             
                                                                                    
          3s   ø-             3pl  šak- ~ ø-                                        
                                                                                    
          The following illustrates the inflectional prefixes for stative verbs in the aorist which are also
                                                                                    
          used for subject and object prefixes in all other modes. The example is lák (sg) and lákla·k (pl)
                                                                                    
          ‘to be strong’ (1932:75:1):                                               
                                                                                    
          1s        hi-ROOT   wí hila·k      ‘I am strong’                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          2s        n̥-ROOT   ná n̥lá·k      ‘you are strong’                       
                                                                                    
          3s        ø-ROOT    há lá·k        ‘he is strong’                         
                                                                                    
          1pl       iš-ROOT   yukít išlákla·k ‘we are strong’                       
                                                                                    
          2pl       nak-ROOT  nakít naklákla·k ‘you (pl) are strong’                
                                                                                    
          3pl       ø-ROOT 2  hakít lákla·k  ‘they are strong’                      
                                                                                    
          The examples below show these prefixes in their use as objects of transitive verbs.
                                                                                    
               [hiˊmic kauˊkau]                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         46                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          37)  himìš kawkàw                                                         
                                                                                    
               hi-miš-ø            kawkaw                                           
                                                                                    
               1SOBJ-give-2SIMP    water                                            
                                                                                    
               ‘Give me water!” (1932:80:2)                                         
                                                                                    
               [‘n huˊ-u ha]                                                        
                                                                                    
          38)  n̥húoháh                                                             
                                                                                    
               n̥-hu-o-hah                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               2SOBJ-see-1SS-NEG                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I do not see you.’ (1932:34:1)                                      
                                                                                    
               [icpaˊts haˊhat]                                                     
                                                                                    
          39)  išpácháhat                                                           
                                                                                    
               iš-ø-pac-hah-at                                                      
                                                                                    
               1PLOBJ-3STATS-beat-NEG-PRET                                          
                                                                                    
               ‘He did not beat us.’ (1932:16:103)                                  
                                                                                    
               [haˊ naˊk tsuˊmĕt]                                                   
                                                                                    
          40)  há nakcúmat                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ha   nak-ø-cum-at                                                    
                                                                                    
               he   2PLOBJ-3STATS-pinch-PRET                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘He pinched you all.’ (1932:123:1)                                   
                                                                                    
          Preterite mode. The preterite mode marker is the suffix -at. It is notable that this mode is split
                                                                                    
          so that first and second person subjects are inflected by means of the stative/object prefixes,
                                                                                    
          while third-person subjects use the active suffixes. The primary meaning of the preterite mode is
                                                                                    
          that the action of the verb is completed, so it is frequently equivalent to the past tense. However,
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         47                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          it is also resultative, so if the present state of the subject is the result of a completed action, the
                                                                                    
          preterite can also refer to a present tense. A paradigm is not provided in the publication,
                                                                                    
          although a paradigm which only includes the second and third persons singular and plural is
                                                                                    
          found in Gatschet’s manuscripts (1885c:3).                                
                                                                                    
          1s        hi-ROOT-at          *hi-ám-at      ‘I drank’                    
                                                                                    
          2s        n̥-ROOT-at          n̥-ám-at       ‘you drank’                  
                                                                                    
          3s        ROOT-ø-at           ám-ø-at        ‘he/she drank’               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          1pl       iš-ROOT-at          *iš-ám-at      ‘we drank’                   
                                                                                    
          2pl       nak-ROOT-at         nak-ám-at      ‘you all drank’              
                                                                                    
          3pl       ø-ROOT-ul-at        ám-ul-at       ‘they drank’                 
                                                                                    
          Examples of preterite forms of verbs are given below.                     
                                                                                    
          First person singular                                                     
                                                                                    
               [wi hikaˊwĕt]                                                        
                                                                                    
          41)  wí hikáwat                                                           
                                                                                    
               wi   hi-kaw-at                                                       
                                                                                    
               I    1SSTATS-be.dead/drunk-PRET                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I was drunk.’ Or, with resultative meaning, ‘I am drunk.’ (1932:60:2)
                                                                                    
               [hilaˊwet]                                                           
                                                                                    
          42)  hiláwat                                                              
                                                                                    
               hi-law-at                                                            
                                                                                    
               1SSTATS-be.burned- PRET                                              
                                                                                    
               ‘I got burned.’ (1932:40:1)                                          
                                                                                    
          Second person singular                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         48                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [wi ikāt ‘npaˊkat]                                                   
                                                                                    
          43)  wi iká·t n̥pákat                                                     
                                                                                    
               wi   ika·t n̥-pak-at                                                 
                                                                                    
               my   foot 2SSTATS-step.on- PRET                                      
                                                                                    
               ‘You stepped on my foot.’ (1932:20:143)                              
                                                                                    
          Third person singular                                                     
                                                                                    
               [Haˊlkin tsīˊpcat Yuk’hiˊti Tuˊl oˊt]                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          44)  hálkin cípšat yukhíti túlot                                          
                                                                                    
               halkin    cipš-ø-at      yukhiti   tul-ot                            
                                                                                    
               afterwards move-3SS-PRET Indian    lake-DIR                          
                                                                                    
               ‘Afterwards he moved to Lake Prien (Indian Lake).’ (1932:16:95)      
                                                                                    
          First person plural                                                       
                                                                                    
               [Yukiˊts icatsiˊckicat yukiˊt okēt huˊne]                            
                                                                                    
          45)  yukíts iššaccíškišat yukít oké·t húne.                               
                                                                                    
               yukit-š   iš-hat-ciškiš-at         yukit oke·t    hu-ne.             
                                                                                    
               we-FOC    1PLSTATS-REFLEX-be:glad-PRET our mother see-GER            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘We were glad to see our mother.’ (1932:17:109)                      
                                                                                    
               [Yukīˊts tiˊcne icōˊñcat]                                            
                                                                                    
          46)  yukíts tíšne išóŋšat                                                 
                                                                                    
               yukit-š   tiš-ne    iš-oŋš-at                                        
                                                                                    
               we-FOC    go(sg)-GER 1PLSTATS-not.want-PRET                          
                                                                                    
               ‘We did not want her to go.’ (1932:17:110)                           
                                                                                    
          Second person plural                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         49                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [nak cakaˊxlecat]                                                    
                                                                                    
          47)  nakšakáɬišat                                                         
                                                                                    
               nak-šak-aƛiš-at                                                      
                                                                                    
               2PLSTATS-3PLOBJ-lose-PRET                                            
                                                                                    
               ‘You all lost them’ (1932:13:58)                                     
                                                                                    
          Third person plural                                                       
                                                                                    
               [hakiˊt teˊm ăˊmulĕt]                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          48)  hakít tém ámulat                                                     
                                                                                    
               hakit tem      am-ul-at                                              
                                                                                    
               they yesterday drink-3PLS-PRET                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘They drank yesterday.’ (1932:129:1)                                 
                                                                                    
          Resultative                                                               
                                                                                    
               [yaˊ ka-ucnăˊ paˊl’at]                                               
                                                                                    
          49)  yá káwšne páłat                                                      
                                                                                    
               ya   kawšne    ø-paƛ-at                                              
                                                                                    
               that comb      3STATS-be.broken-PRET                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘That comb is broken.’ (1932:102:2)                                  
                                                                                    
          Dubitative mode. This mode like the preterite mode, is split, with first and second person
                                                                                    
          subjects being marked by the stative/object prefixes, and third person subjects are marked by the
                                                                                    
          active suffixes. This mode indicates that an action may take place, but does not make a
                                                                                    
          judgement on its probability. The dubitative is usually translated as a future in Gatschet and
                                                                                    
          Swanton, but it is often qualified with some element of doubt, and this, with the examples,
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         50                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          suggests its meaning. The dubitative is marked by the suffix -ehe. A full paradigm using the
                                                                                    
          verb am ‘to drink’ is found in the publication (1932:26:1).               
                                                                                    
          1s        hi-ROOT-ehe         hi-ám-ehe      ‘I might drink it’           
                                                                                    
          2s        n̥-ROOT-ehe         n̥-ám-ehe      ‘you might drink it’         
                                                                                    
          3s        ROOT-ø-ehe          ám-ø-ehe       ‘he/she might drink it’      
                                                                                    
          1pl       iš-ROOT-ehe         iš-ám-ehe      ‘we might drink it’          
                                                                                    
          2pl       nak-ROOT-ehe        nak-ám-ehe     ‘you all might drink it’     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          3pl       ROOT-ul-ehe         ám-ul-ehe      ‘they might drink it’        
                                                                                    
          The following are further examples:                                       
                                                                                    
               [Yíl mōn taˊ-i ō hoˊktiwē icwāˊñĕhĕ]                                 
                                                                                    
          50)  yíl mo·n táy o hoktiwé·išwáŋehe                                      
                                                                                    
               yil  mo·n tay  o         hok-tiwe·-iš-waŋ-ehe                        
                                                                                    
               day  every river along   RECIP-be.together-1PLSTATS-walk-DUB 3       
                                                                                    
               ‘We might walk along the river together every day.’ (1932:13:45)     
                                                                                    
               [ha hilaˊ-i aˊv oˊt’ĕhĕ]                                             
                                                                                    
          51)  ha hiláy áwp ókehe                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ha   hilay awp ok-ø-ehe                                              
                                                                                    
               his  wife here come-3SS-DUB                                          
                                                                                    
               ‘His wife may come here.’ (1932:41:1)                                
                                                                                    
               [ōl ‘n oˊkĕn ictiˊuĕhĕ]                                              
                                                                                    
          52)  ó·l n̥óken ištíwehe                                                  
                                                                                    
               ó·l  n̥-ók-en       iš-tíw-ehe                                       
                                                                                    
               near 2SSTATS-come-IF 1PLSTATS-go(pl)-DUB                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         51                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘If you come near, we may go.’ (1932:84:1)                           
                                                                                    
               [haˊkit cokoˊ-i-yulĕhĕ]                                              
                                                                                    
          53)  hakìt šokóyulehe                                                     
                                                                                    
               hakit šokoy-ul-ehe                                                   
                                                                                    
               they be.chief-3PLS-DUB                                               
                                                                                    
               ‘They may become chiefs.’ (1932:69:1)                                
                                                                                    
          Future mode. This mode, marked by the suffix -tikit, is used to indicate an action that will
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          definitely occur in the future. In this mode, all subjects are indicated by the stative/object
                                                                                    
          prefixes. Gatschet’s glosses do not distinguish clearly between the dubitative and the future;
                                                                                    
          however, in the one text example (54 below) the distinction becomes clear:
                                                                                    
               {iyā́ng tī́via ná-u o’ho’h ishyā́mcne áyip kunä́ ka’hlṓpc tsäma kúts shoχmōn
                                                                                    
          54)  iyáŋ tíwya náwohóh išyá·mšne áyip konán kathópš cimakúc šokmó·n      
                                                                                    
               ish yā́mshĕhĕ kidsónkshkin i shakwāktikit4}                          
                                                                                    
               išyá·mšehe kicóŋškin iššakwáktikit                                   
                                                                                    
               iyaŋ tiw=ya    nawohoh   iš-ya·mš-ne         ay-ip     konan         
                                                                                    
               there go=and   chinquapin 1PLSTATS-gather-GER swamp-LOC potato       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               kathopš   cimakuc   šok-mo·n  iš-ya·mš-ehe        kicoŋš-kin         
                                                                                    
               waterlily crawfish  thing-all 1PLSTATS-gather-DUB fire-LOC           
                                                                                    
               iš-šak-wak-tikit                                                     
                                                                                    
               1PLSTATS-PL.OBJ-roast-FUT                                            
                                                                                    
               ‘Us going there and gathering chinquapins; we may gather everything, duck
                                                                                    
               potatoes, waterlilies, and crawfish. We will roast them in the fire.’ (Gatschet,
                                                                                    
               1885b:154)                                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         52                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          In this example, the speaker is telling the listener the things that they may gather when they go
                                                                                    
          out together, but whatever they have gathered they will definitely roast.5 A further semantic
                                                                                    
          difference between the future and the dubitative is noted by Gatschet (1885c:[10]), in that while
                                                                                    
          an interrogative can be formed from a future, it is not permitted to be formed on a dubitative. In
                                                                                    
          this mode, the third person plural form is formally identical to the third person singular form, and
                                                                                    
          only context distinguishes the two. An almost complete paradigm of the future is given in the
                                                                                    
          publication (1932:25:2).                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          1s        hi-ROOT-tikit       *hi-ám-tikit6  ‘I shall drink it’           
                                                                                    
          2s        n̥-ROOT-tikit       n-ám-tikit     ‘you will drink it’          
                                                                                    
          3s        ø-ROOT-tikit        ø-ám-tikit     ‘he/she will drink it’       
                                                                                    
          1pl       iš-ROOT-tikit       iš-ám-tikit    ‘we shall drink it’          
                                                                                    
          2pl       nak-ROOT-tikit      nak-ám-tikit   ‘you all will drink it’      
                                                                                    
          3pl       ø-ROOT-tikit        ø-ám-tikit     ‘they will drink it’         
                                                                                    
          The following are further examples of the future:                         
                                                                                    
               [haˊl hiwaˊntikit haˊ]                                               
                                                                                    
          55)  hál hiwáŋtikithah                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               hal  hi-waŋ-tikit-hah                                                
                                                                                    
               again 1SSTATS-walk-FUT-NEG                                           
                                                                                    
               ‘I shall not walk again.’ (1932:141:1)                               
                                                                                    
               [‘nkaˊ-utikit]                                                       
                                                                                    
          56)  n̥káwtikit                                                           
                                                                                    
               n̥-kaw-tikit                                                         
                                                                                    
               2SSTATS-die-FUT                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         53                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘You will die.’ (1932:60:2)                                          
                                                                                    
               [uctiˊkit]                                                           
                                                                                    
          57)  ùštikit                                                              
                                                                                    
               ø-uš-tikit                                                           
                                                                                    
               3STATS-be.so- FUT                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘It will be so.’ (1932:139:2)                                        
                                                                                    
          Progressive mode. This mode is uniquely marked by the suffix -kit for singular subject and -tit
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          for plural subject. It indicates that the action of the verb to which it is suffixed is ongoing at the
                                                                                    
          time of speaking. The paradigm with the verb ám is found only in Gatschet’s field notes
                                                                                    
          (1883c:10), not in the publication.                                       
                                                                                    
          1s        hi-ROOT-kit    hi-ám-kit           ‘I am drinking it’           
                                                                                    
          2s        n̥-ROOT-kit    n̥-ám-kit           ‘you are drinking it’        
                                                                                    
          3s        ø-ROOT-kit     ø-ám-kit            ‘he/she is drinking it’      
                                                                                    
          1pl       iš-ROOT-tit    iš-ám-tit           ‘we are drinking it’         
                                                                                    
          2pl       nak-ROOT-tit   nak-ám-tit          ‘you all are drinking it’    
                                                                                    
          3pl       ø-ROOT-tit     ø-ám-tit or šak-ám-tit ‘they are drinking it’    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          First person singular:                                                    
                                                                                    
               [himakauˊkit]                                                        
                                                                                    
          58)  himakáwkit                                                           
                                                                                    
               hi-makaw-kit                                                         
                                                                                    
               1SSTATS-fall(sg)-PROG(SG)                                            
                                                                                    
               ‘I am falling.’ (1932:78:1)                                          
                                                                                    
               [wic aˊ cokihuˊkit haˊx̥ c]                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         54                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          59)  wí·š á šokhihúkitháhš                                                
                                                                                    
               wi-iš a   šok-hi-hu-kit-hahš                                         
                                                                                    
               I-foc this sth-1SSTATS-see-PROG(SG)-NEG                              
                                                                                    
               ‘I don’t see anything.’ (1932:34:2)                                  
                                                                                    
          Second person singular:                                                   
                                                                                    
               [nkaˊkit]                                                            
                                                                                    
          60)  n̥kákit                                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               n̥-ka-kit                                                            
                                                                                    
               2SSTATS-do-PROG(SG)                                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘You are doing it.’ (1932:55:2)                                      
                                                                                    
          Third person singular:                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Tsīs wāñ-haihaiˊckit]                                               
                                                                                    
          61)  cíš waŋhayháyškit                                                    
                                                                                    
               ciš  ø-waŋ-hayhayš-kit                                               
                                                                                    
               baby 3STATS-go.about-cry-PROG(SG)                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘The baby is going about crying.’ (1932:14:66)                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          First person plural:                                                      
                                                                                    
               {kaukáu ishámtit á}                                                  
                                                                                    
          62)  kawkáw išámtit á                                                     
                                                                                    
               kawkaw    iš-am-tit           a                                      
                                                                                    
               water     1PLSTAT-drink-PROG(PL) Q                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘Are we drinking water?’ (Gatschet, 1885c:[10])                      
                                                                                    
          The singular progressive suffix is found with a first-person plural subject in one example:
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         55                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [yukiˊt icatpaˊwickit]                                               
                                                                                    
          63)  yukít išhatpáwiškit                                                  
                                                                                    
               yukit iš-hat-paw-iš-kit                                              
                                                                                    
               we   1PLSTAT-REFLEX-swing-CAUS-PROG(SG)                              
                                                                                    
               ‘We are swinging.’                                                   
                                                                                    
          Second person plural:                                                     
                                                                                    
               {kaukaú nak amtit á}                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          64)  kawkáw nakámtit á                                                    
                                                                                    
               kawkaw    nak-am-tit          a                                      
                                                                                    
               water     2PLSTATS-drink-PROG(PL) Q                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘Are you all drinking water?’ (Gatschet, 1885c:[10])                 
                                                                                    
          Third person plural:                                                      
                                                                                    
               [naˊ-u taˊ-u-walwaˊlctit]                                            
                                                                                    
          65)  náw tawwalwálštit                                                    
                                                                                    
               naw       taw-ø-walwalš-tit                                          
                                                                                    
               feather STAND-3STATS-wave-PROG(PL)                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘The feathers are waving.’ (1932:131:1)                              
                                                                                    
               {shakshṓsh shóksho wáng-shólktit}                                   
                                                                                    
          66)  šakšó·š šakšò wáŋšólktit                                             
                                                                                    
               šakšo·š   šak-šo    waŋ-ø-šolk-tit                                   
                                                                                    
               bird      PL-seed   go.about-3STATS-pick.up.many-PROG(PL)            
                                                                                    
               ‘The birds are going about picking up the seeds.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:90)
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         56                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Subordinate mode. The subordinate mode is the form of verbs in clauses that provide
                                                                                    
          additional information about the action of the verb in the main clause. The principal suffixes of
                                                                                    
          the subordinate mode are -en, ‘if; when’ -kin, ‘when,’ and -ip ‘because.’ The time of the verb in
                                                                                    
          the subordinate mode is dependent on the verb in the main clause; it is not marked in this mode.
                                                                                    
          Any first- or second-person subjects are marked on the verb with the prefixes that mark direct
                                                                                    
          objects in the aorist mode.                                               
                                                                                    
          The suffix -n̥ . This suffix indicates that if one action takes place, another will follow, or if an
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          action took place, another happened as a result. It is best translated by ‘if’ or ‘when.’
                                                                                    
          Occasionally syllabic –n̥ appears as –n after a vowel. The following paradigm from is Gatschet
                                                                                    
          (1885c:[6]).                                                              
                                                                                    
          1s        hi-ROOT-n̥     hi-ám-n̥       ‘if I drink it’                   
                                                                                    
          2s        n-ROOT-n̥      n-ám-n̥        ‘if you drink it’                 
                                                                                    
          3s        ø-ROOT-n̥      ø-ám-n̥        ‘if he/she drinks it’             
                                                                                    
          1pl       iš-ROOT-n̥     iš-ám-n̥       ‘if we drink it’                  
                                                                                    
          2pl       nak-ROOT-n̥    nak-ám-n̥      ‘if you all drink it’             
                                                                                    
          3pl       šak-ROOT-n̥    šak-ám-n̥      ‘if they drink it’                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Iˊcāk hilaˊ-i tanuˊk keˊat. icāk hilaˊ-i tsīk keˊ-ĕn hatseˊ-ec]     
                                                                                    
          67)  išà·k hiláy tanúk kéat. išá·k hiláy cí·k kén̥ hacehéš                
                                                                                    
               iša·k     hilay tanuk ø-ke-at.     iša·k     hilay ci·k              
                                                                                    
               person    wife one  3STATS-have-PRET person  wife two                
                                                                                    
               ø-ke-n̥        haceheš                                               
                                                                                    
               3STATS-have-IF be.bad                                                
                                                                                    
               ‘A man had only one wife. If a man has two wives, it is a bad thing.’(1932:10;15-16)
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         57                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Icāˊk hokwaˊñc wāˊñĕn haˊ cok’-okināˊtsne mōn hoktiwēˊ imōˊculat]   
                                                                                    
          68)  išá·k hokwáŋš wáŋn̥ ha šokhokinácne mo·n hoktiwé·himó·šulat          
                                                                                    
               iša·k     hokwaŋš   ø-waŋ-n̥       ha   šok-hok-inac-ne              
                                                                                    
               person    war       3STATS-go.about-IF his STH-RECIP-fight-GER       
                                                                                    
               mo·n hoktiwe·-himo·š-ul-at                                           
                                                                                    
               all  be.together-bury-3PLS-PRET                                      
                                                                                    
               ‘If a person had gone to war, they buried all his weapons together with him.’
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               (1932:19:129-30)                                                     
                                                                                    
               [aˊv ‘nokĕn icăˊmĕhĕ]                                                
                                                                                    
          69)  áwp n̥ókn̥ išámehe                                                   
                                                                                    
               awp  n̥-ok-n̥       iš-am-ehe                                        
                                                                                    
               here 2STATS-come-IF 1PLSTATS-drink-DUB                               
                                                                                    
               ‘If you come here, we might then drink it.’ (1932:26:1)              
                                                                                    
               [Yaˊ icaˊk kaˊ-u yuk’hiˊti cox̥ koˊ-in haˊ tsanuˊk nec ipaˊx̥ c icā́t atyĕˊnē
                                                                                    
          70)  yá išá·k káw yukhíti šokóyn̥ ha canúk nešipáhš iša·thatyínšne        
                                                                                    
               laklaˊkc kopik kaˊ hoktiwēˊ imōˊculat]                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               laklákškopik ká hoktiwé·himó·šulat                                   
                                                                                    
               ya   iša·k     kaw  yukhiti   ø-šokoy-n̥     ha   canuk              
                                                                                    
               nešipahš                                                             
                                                                                    
               that person    dead Indian    3STATS-be.chief-IF his horse saddle    
                                                                                    
               iša·t-hat-yinš-ne   laklakš-kop-ik           ka                      
                                                                                    
               head-REFLEX-wrap-GER precious.metal-white-ERG.INSTR make             
                                                                                    
               hok-tiwe·-himo·š-ul-at                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         58                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               RECIP-be.together -bury-3PLS-PRET                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘If that dead person were an Indian chief, they buried him together with his horse,
                                                                                    
               saddle, and crown made of silver.’ (1932:19:131-33)                  
                                                                                    
               [cukaˊhāˊñctin imōˊculat]                                            
                                                                                    
          71)  šoká·kháŋštin himó·šulat                                             
                                                                                    
               šoká·k-háŋš-ti-n                   himo·š-ul-at                      
                                                                                    
               ceremonial.dance-FINISH-PST.PROG-WHEN bury-3PLS-PRET                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘When they had finished the ceremonial dance, they buried him/her.’ (1932:18:124-25)
                                                                                    
               [nec hicoˊmckin yuk’hiˊti tulip lōˊx̥ kin iwāˊt’n hūˊnst yiˊl iwāˊt’n]
                                                                                    
          72)  neš išó·mškin yukhíti túlip lókkin iwá·tn̥ húnst yíl iwá·tn̥         
                                                                                    
               neš  išo·mš-kin yukhiti tul-ip lok-kin  ø-iwa·t-n̥                   
                                                                                    
               tree small(pl)-LOC Indian lake-INESS prairie-LOC 3STATS-move.hither-WHEN
                                                                                    
               ø-hu-nšt       yil       ø-iwa·t-n̥                                  
                                                                                    
               3STATS-see-CUSTOM by.day 3STATS-move.hither-WHEN                     
                                                                                    
               ‘They customarily see it in the brush around Lake Prien (Indian Lake), when it
                                                                                    
               moves towards them in the prairie, when it moves towards them by day.’ (1932:11:35-
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               36)                                                                  
                                                                                    
          This suffix is also used on the final verb of a sentence to indicate an unrealized or hypothetical
                                                                                    
          action.                                                                   
                                                                                    
               [wi cak wăˊci ik’haˊ-uts tik’haˊnĕt kēˊmc hi aˊ-ucĕn ikaˊ-uts’n]     
                                                                                    
          73)  wi šakwáši ikháwc tikháŋat ké·mš hiáwšn̥ ikháwcn̥                    
                                                                                    
               wi   šak-waši  ø-ikhawc       tik-ø-haŋ-at        ke·mš              
                                                                                    
               my   person-old 3STATS-drown  GO.AND-3STATS-fail-PRET row            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         59                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               hi-awš-n̥           ø-ikhawc-n̥                                      
                                                                                    
               1SSTATS-not.know-IF 3STATS-drown-IF                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘My husband went and almost drowned; if I had not known how to row, he would
                                                                                    
               have drowned.’ (1932:47:1)                                           
                                                                                    
               [kiˊc ‘ntoˊlĕn naˊxkan tiˊcĕn]                                       
                                                                                    
          74)  kíš n̥tóln̥ náhka n̥tíšn̥                                            
                                                                                    
               kíš       n̥-tol-n̥      nahka          n̥-tíš-n̥                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               woman     2SSTATS-be.good-IF <must.not>7 2SSTATS-go-IF               
                                                                                    
               ‘If you are a good woman, you must not go.’ (1932:34:1)              
                                                                                    
               [coˊk (h)iwineˊat nāˊkc naˊxkan waˊncĕn]                             
                                                                                    
          75)  šók hiwinéat ná·kš náhka n̥wáncn̥                                    
                                                                                    
               šók       hi-wine-at     na-ik-š        nahka                        
                                                                                    
               something 1SSTATS-find-PRET you-ERG.AGNT-FOC must.not7               
                                                                                    
               n̥-wanc-n̥                                                           
                                                                                    
               2SSTATS-tell-IF                                                      
                                                                                    
               ‘I found something; you must say nothing to anyone.’ (1932:142:2)    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           There are a handful of examples of the suffix -n̥ following the third person plural aorist suffix -
                                                                                    
          ul and the first-person plural aorist suffix -cel; in the former case there is no recorded
                                                                                    
          assimilation, but in the latter case the sequence ln̥ becomes nn.         
                                                                                    
               [Caˊ cok’hĕc hiweˊ-u kaˊ-ulĕn]                                       
                                                                                    
          76)  šá šoké·š hiwéw káuln̥                                               
                                                                                    
               ša        šoke·š    hiwew     ka-ul-n̥                               
                                                                                    
               someone   be.sick   be.strong do-3PLS-IF                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         60                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘When some people became very sick…’ (1932:17:112)                   
                                                                                    
               [yukiˊt paiˊ ōˊktsen]                                                
                                                                                    
          77)  yukít payókcenn                                                      
                                                                                    
               yukit pay-ok-cel-n̥                                                  
                                                                                    
               we   BACK-come-1PLS-IF                                               
                                                                                    
               ‘when we return…’ (1932:158:1)                                       
                                                                                    
          The suffix -kin. This temporal affix indicates that the action of the verb to which it is suffixed
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          has to occur before the action of the verb of the main clause. It can be translated ‘when;’ more
                                                                                    
          literally ‘the time when.’ It is homophonous with the locative suffix -kin and may be formally
                                                                                    
          identical to it. A nearly complete paradigm occurs in Gatschet’s field notes (1885c:[6])
                                                                                    
          1s        hi-ROOT-kin    hi-ám-kin      ‘when I drink it’                 
                                                                                    
          2s        n̥-ROOT-kin    n̥-ám-kin      ‘when you drink it’               
                                                                                    
          3s        ø-ROOT-kin     ø-ám-kin       ‘when he/she drinks it’           
                                                                                    
          1pl       iš-ROOT-kin    *iš-ám-kin8    ‘when we drink it’                
                                                                                    
          2pl       nak-ROOT-kin   nak-ám-kin     ‘when you all drink it’           
                                                                                    
          3pl       šak-ROOT-kin   šak-ám-kin     ‘when they drink it’              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Taˊkapa kic n icāˊk kaˊ-ukin īt utskaˊ-uculat okyuˊlik yaˊ okaˊ oˊtsi]
                                                                                    
          78)  tákapa kíšn̥ išá·k káwkin í·t uckáwšulat okyúlikya okká óci          
                                                                                    
               takapa    kiš=n̥    iša·k ø-kaw-kin          i·t                     
                                                                                    
               Atakapa   woman=and man  3STATS-die(sg)-WHEN face                    
                                                                                    
               uckawš-ul-at                                                         
                                                                                    
               cover-3PLS-PRET                                                      
                                                                                    
               okyul-ik=ya              okka oci                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         61                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               handkerchief-ERG.INSTR=and cloth on.top                              
                                                                                    
               ‘When an Atakapa woman or man died, they covered the face with a     
                                                                                    
               handkerchief and put a cloth on top.’ (1932:18:120)                  
                                                                                    
               [Hikaˊ-uckin kaˊt oˊts paˊkĕt]                                       
                                                                                    
          79)  hikáwškin iká·t óc pákat                                             
                                                                                    
               hikawš-kin ika·t    oc        ø-pak-at                               
                                                                                    
               finish-WHEN mouth   on.top.of 3STATS-hit-PRET                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘When she finished, she hit her on the mouth.’ (1932:20:143-44)      
                                                                                    
               [wiˊc ke hiaˊmkin Jack makaˊwět]                                     
                                                                                    
          80)  wí·š kewhiámkin <Jack> makáwat                                       
                                                                                    
               wi-iš kew-hi-am-kin      <Jack>    makaw-at                          
                                                                                    
               I-FOC SIT-1SSTATS-drink-WHEN PN    fall(sg)-PRET                     
                                                                                    
               ‘When I was sitting and drinking, Jack fell down.’ (1932:62:2)       
                                                                                    
               [Wāˊñ-hokpēˊmkin iˊcāk cakōˊñne okcĕkiaˊlat]                         
                                                                                    
          81)  wáŋhokpé·mkin iša·kšakkóŋne okšakyálat                               
                                                                                    
               ø-waŋ-hok-pe·m-kin       iša·kšakkoŋne                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               3STATS-go.about-RECIP-shoot-WHEN sheriff                             
                                                                                    
               ok-šak-yal-at                                                        
                                                                                    
               COME.AND-3PLO-sieze(pl)-PRET                                         
                                                                                    
               ‘When they were going about shooting at each other, the sheriff came and
                                                                                    
               arrested them.’ (1932:20:147-48)                                     
                                                                                    
          The suffix -ip. This suffix indicates that the action of the main verb of the clause is a result of
                                                                                    
          the action of the verb to which it is suffixed. It can thus be translated ‘because.’ This suffix is
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         62                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          homophonous to the inessive case suffix, and may be formally identical to it. The only examples
                                                                                    
          of its use were obtained through elicitation; none occur in the texts. In addition, Gatschet did not
                                                                                    
          elicit a paradigm, as he did for the other suffixes of the subordinate mode.
                                                                                    
               [hicokēcip hioˊk aˊxcat]                                             
                                                                                    
          82)  hišoké·šip hiókháhšat                                                
                                                                                    
               hi-šoke·š-ip        hi-ok-hahš-at                                    
                                                                                    
               1SSTATS-be.sick-CAUSE 1SSTATS-come-NEG-PRET                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘Because I was sick, I did not come.’ (1932:38:1)                    
                                                                                    
               [Jack an laˊkin inhoˊlcilat hiweˊ-uka aˊmip]                         
                                                                                    
          83)  <Jack> aŋlá·kkin inhólšulat hiwéwka ámip                             
                                                                                    
               <Jack>    aŋ-la·k-kin    inholš-ul-at   hiwew-ka                     
                                                                                    
               PN        house-strong-LOC put.in-3PLS-PRET be.strong-ADV            
                                                                                    
               ø-am-ip                                                              
                                                                                    
               3STATS-drink-CAUSE                                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘They put Jack in jail because he was drinking hard.’ (1932:26:1)    
                                                                                    
          Gerund. The gerund is formed by suffixing -ne to the verb root. The gerund is a noun, and
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          supplies the verbal infinitive. A gerund can be formed from a compound verb, and from a
                                                                                    
          negated verb. In addition, the gerundial suffix derives new nouns from verbs. It was especially
                                                                                    
          productive in creating new terms for items of European technology, for which see the section on
                                                                                    
          nominalization. The gerund is used as the complement to verbs such as ka ‘to make’ kóhš ‘to
                                                                                    
          want,’ óŋš ‘not to want,’ hatpéh ‘to be ready to,’ and nám ‘to beg.’ The gerund also is used to
                                                                                    
          nominalize a verb phrase to create a relative clause equivalent (see the chapter below on syntax).
                                                                                    
          The gerund has the variant -n, which occurs after the vowel a.            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         63                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [kitsaˊk aˊmne toˊl haˊ]                                             
                                                                                    
          84)  kicá·k ámne tólháh                                                   
                                                                                    
               kica·k    am-ne     ø-tol-hah                                        
                                                                                    
               whiskey   drink-GER 3STATS-be.good-NEG                               
                                                                                    
               ‘It is not good to drink whiskey.’ (1932:135:1)                      
                                                                                    
               [puˊns’n kaˊ-u]                                                      
                                                                                    
          85)  púnsne káo                                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               punš-ne   ka-o                                                       
                                                                                    
               blow-GER  make-1SS                                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘I make him blow.’ (1932:107:2)                                      
                                                                                    
               [nimaˊn kōˊx̥ caˊhulat]9                                             
                                                                                    
          86)  nimán kóhšháhulat                                                    
                                                                                    
               nima-n    ø-kohš-hah-ul-at                                           
                                                                                    
               kill-GER  3STATS-want-NEG-3PLS-PRET                                  
                                                                                    
               They did not want to kill him. (1932:68:1)                           
                                                                                    
               [paknaˊ-u wan năn hioˊñc]                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          87)  paknáwwáŋne nhióŋš                                                   
                                                                                    
               paknaw-waŋ-ne  n-hi-oŋš                                              
                                                                                    
               run-go.about-GER 2SO-1SSTATS-not.to.want                             
                                                                                    
               ‘I don’t want you to go running about.’ (1932:101:2)                 
                                                                                    
               [Yukīˊts tiˊcne icōˊñcat]                                            
                                                                                    
          88)  yukíts tíšne išóŋšat                                                 
                                                                                    
               yukit-š   tiš-ne    iš-oŋš-at                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         64                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               we-FOC    go(sg)-GER 1PLSTATS-not.want-PRET                          
                                                                                    
               ‘We did not want her to go.’ (1932:17:110)                           
                                                                                    
               [Kēˊtne naˊmtsel tiˊc hāˊxcne]                                       
                                                                                    
          89)  ké·tne námcel tišhahšne                                              
                                                                                    
               ke·t-ne   nam-cel   tiš-hahš-ne                                      
                                                                                    
               stay-GER  beg-1PLS  go(sg)-NEG-GER                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘We begged her to stay and not to go.’ (1932:17:110-111)             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          The gerund is also used to mean ‘for V-ing.’ In this usage its meaning is very close to that of the
                                                                                    
          participle.                                                               
                                                                                    
               [aˊñ-idsōˊn otōˊlco ‘nkēˊtne yukiˊt aˊnkin]                          
                                                                                    
          90)  aŋicón itólšo n̥ké·tne yukít áŋkin                                   
                                                                                    
               aŋicon    itolš-o   n̥-ke·t-ne          yukit aŋ-kin                 
                                                                                    
               room      prepare-1SS 2SSTATS-stay-GER  our  house-LOC               
                                                                                    
               ‘I have prepared a room for you to stay in at our house.’ (1932:12:42-43)
                                                                                    
               [Tsanuˊk miˊcat pēˊnene]                                             
                                                                                    
          91)  canúk míšat pénine                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               canuk     ø-miš-at       péni-ne                                     
                                                                                    
               horse     3SO-give-PRET  cure-GER                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘She gave him a horse for curing her.’ (1932:13:56-57)               
                                                                                    
               [Yukiˊti mōˊne oˊk-inuˊlat imōˊc oˊt tiˊune]                         
                                                                                    
          92)  yukhíti mó·ni hokinúlat himó·šot tíwne                               
                                                                                    
               yukhiti mo·ni  hok-in-ul-at        himo·š-ot tiw-ne                  
                                                                                    
               Indian all(animate) RECIP-gather-3PLS-PRET burial-DIR go(pl)-GER     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         65                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘The Indians all gathered together in order to go to the burial.’ (1932:18:125-26)
                                                                                    
               [hoˊxp naˊ-ulat coˊ itaˊxne]                                         
                                                                                    
          93)  hóp náwulat šó hitáhne                                               
                                                                                    
               hop  naw-ul-at      šo   hitah-ne                                    
                                                                                    
               hole leave-3PLS-PRET soul come.out-GER                               
                                                                                    
               ‘They left a hole for the soul to come out.’ (1932:19:139-140)       
                                                                                    
          The verb háhš ‘not to have’ has an irregular gerund, há·n. This derives from the occasional form
                                                                                    
          háhan10 which does not use the verbalizing suffix –š. The gerund shows the regular shortening
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          of VhV to V·.                                                             
                                                                                    
               [Icāˊk icaˊt haˊn huˊ-ulat]                                          
                                                                                    
          94)  išá·k išá·t há·n húulat                                              
                                                                                    
               iša·k     iša·t ha·n          hu-ul-at                               
                                                                                    
               person    head not.to.have(GER) see-3PLS-PRET                        
                                                                                    
               ‘They saw it as not having a human head.’ (1932:11:33)               
                                                                                    
               [cāˊkco hilōcne hān]                                                 
                                                                                    
          95)  šá·kšo hiló·šne há·n                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ša·kšo    hi-lohiš-ne    ha·n                                        
                                                                                    
               someone   1SO-help-GER   not.to.have(GER)                            
                                                                                    
               ‘There is no one to help me.’ (1932:77:2)                            
                                                                                    
           The verb ké, ‘to have,’ has an irregular gerund, ké·tne, which is homophonous with the gerund
                                                                                    
          of ké·t, ‘to sit.’ Tottokš insisted that the two forms were distinct. A regular form kéne also
                                                                                    
          occurs.                                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         66                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Participle. The participle is formed by suffixing -ta to the verb root. The participle is
                                                                                    
          uninflected for person of the subject, which is often understood through context alone. This
                                                                                    
          participle expresses purpose, and can be translated as ‘in order to,’ or ‘to be supposed to.’ This
                                                                                    
          is clearest when the participle depends on another verb.                  
                                                                                    
               [hakīt cakyīˊkcta oˊkulĕt]                                           
                                                                                    
          96)  hakít šakyíkšta ókulat                                               
                                                                                    
               hakit šak-yikš-ta   ok-ul-at                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               they 3PLO-buy-PCPL  come-3PLS-PRET                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘They came in order to buy things.’ (1932:155:2)                     
                                                                                    
               [cakikoˊmta oˊko]                                                    
                                                                                    
          97)  šakikómta óko                                                        
                                                                                    
               šak-ikom-ta    ok-o                                                  
                                                                                    
               3PLO-fish-PCPL come-1SS                                              
                                                                                    
               ‘I come for fishing.’ (1932:70:2)                                    
                                                                                    
          The participle can occur without a verb on which it depends or an expressed pronominal subject.
                                                                                    
          The construction is translated “one is to V” and if the subject is not expressed, it is then
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          understood from context.                                                  
                                                                                    
               [Yiˊl paˊxĕ ‘nyaˊ-uta ‘noˊkne]                                       
                                                                                    
          98)  yíl páhw n̥yáwta n̥ókne                                              
                                                                                    
               yil  pahw      n̥-yaw-ta           n̥-ok-ne                          
                                                                                    
               day  seven     2SOBJ-wait.for-PCPL 2SSTATS-come-GER                  
                                                                                    
               ‘I am to wait seven days for you to come.’ (1932:12:42)              
                                                                                    
               [wi nûnˊ uˊckin keˊta]                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         67                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          99)  wí nuŋuškin ke·tta                                                   
                                                                                    
               wi   nuŋuš-kin ke·t-ta                                               
                                                                                    
               I    city-LOC  stay-PCPL                                             
                                                                                    
               ‘I am to stay in New Orleans.’ (1932:139:1)                          
                                                                                    
               [nē mak oˊtsip tiˊcta wi itēt teweˊta]                               
                                                                                    
          100) ne·mak ocip tišta wi ite·t tiwe·ta                                   
                                                                                    
               ne·mak    oc-ip     tiš-ta    wi   ite·t     tiwe·-ta                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               mountain  on-INESS  go(sg)-PCPL my father    be.with-PCPL            
                                                                                    
               ‘I am to go into the mountains in order to be with my father.’ (The possessive
                                                                                    
               phrase indicates the subject of the sentence.) (1932:78:1)           
                                                                                    
          A negative form of the participle also occurs.                            
                                                                                    
               {maká-u háχshta}                                                     
                                                                                    
          101) makáwháhšta                                                          
                                                                                    
               makaw-hahš-ta                                                        
                                                                                    
               fall(sg)-NEG-PCPL                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘It is not to fall.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:32)                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Except for example 98, the participle occurs only in elicited material. In the texts purpose is
                                                                                    
          indicated by the gerund, as in example 90 passim above.                   
                                                                                    
          Stative verbs. A stative verb is a verb in which the affixes which inflect the verb for notational
                                                                                    
          subject are the same as the ones that mark the direct object of a transitive verb. This kind of
                                                                                    
          verbal inflection, a split-S system, is widespread among languages in the Southeast. In contrast
                                                                                    
          to the neighboring languages to the east, Chitimacha (Swadesh, 1946a:326), west, Tonkawa
                                                                                    
          (Hoijer 1933:70), and north, Caddo (Melnar, 2004:42-45) where stative verbal inflection is
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         68                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          restricted, in Atakapa all verbs, except those in the aorist mode, are inflected as stative verbs. In
                                                                                    
          the aorist mode itself, there are a handful of verbs that are always inflected as stative verbs.
                                                                                    
          Aorist stative verbs primarily refer to emotional or physical states over which the subject has
                                                                                    
          little or no control.                                                     
                                                                                    
               [ayiˊl kaukauˊkit hēˊyilākc]                                         
                                                                                    
          102) ayíl kawkáwkit hiilákc                                               
                                                                                    
               a-yil     kawkaw-kit     hi-ilakc                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               this-day  rain-PROG(SG)  1SSTATS-be.bored/lazy                       
                                                                                    
               ‘It is raining today; I am bored.’ (1932:41:1)                       
                                                                                    
               [mpeˊtsta]                                                           
                                                                                    
          103) n̥péct á                                                             
                                                                                    
               n̥-pect        a                                                     
                                                                                    
               2SSTATS-be.tired(sg) Q                                               
                                                                                    
               ‘Are you tired?’ (1932:105:1)                                        
                                                                                    
          The verbs ké ‘to have something,’ and héwš, ‘to have a lot of something,’ in the aorist are always
                                                                                    
          inflected as stative verbs.                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [kuˊtsnă(n) nakēˊa]                                                  
                                                                                    
          104) kúcnan nakké á                                                       
                                                                                    
               kucnan    nak-ke         a                                           
                                                                                    
               knife     2PLSTATS-have  Q                                           
                                                                                    
               ‘Do you all have a knife?’ (1932:63:1)                               
                                                                                    
               [wiˊ cokiaknăˊn heheˊ-uc]                                            
                                                                                    
          105) wí šokyahnan hihewš                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         69                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               wi   šokyahnán hi-héwš                                               
                                                                                    
               I    food      1SSTATS-have.much                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘I have a lot of food.’ (1932:152:2)                                 
                                                                                    
          Full paradigms of the stative verbs ké ‘to have’ (1932:63:1) and óŋš ‘not to want’ (1932:98:1)
                                                                                    
          appear in the corpus. In the published paradigm, ké does not distinguish between third person
                                                                                    
          singular and plural subjects; however, examples such as 236 show the third-person plural subject
                                                                                    
          marker to be šak- as well.                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          1s        hi-ké          hi-óŋš                                           
                                                                                    
          2s        n-ké           n-óŋš                                            
                                                                                    
          3s        ké             óŋš                                              
                                                                                    
          1pl       iš-ké          iš-óŋš                                           
                                                                                    
          2pl       nak-ké         nak-óŋš                                          
                                                                                    
          3pl       ké             šak-óŋš                                          
                                                                                    
          Negation. The suffix -háh/-háhš negates the action of the verb. Its location in the verb complex
                                                                                    
          is somewhat free. It always follows the affixes of the future and progressive modes, and usually
                                                                                    
          directly follows the root in the aorist mode. Occasionally it precedes the third-person plural
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          suffix -ul, although doing so seems to make no difference in meaning. The negative suffix
                                                                                    
          always precedes the gerund suffix -ne and the preterite mode suffix -at.  
                                                                                    
               [haˊl hiwaˊntikit haˊ]                                               
                                                                                    
          106) hál hiwáŋtikitháh                                                    
                                                                                    
               hal  hi-waŋ-tikit-hah                                                
                                                                                    
               again 1SSTATS-walk-FUT-NEG                                           
                                                                                    
               ‘I shall not walk again.’ (1932:141:1)                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         70                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [itiyiˊlc ihukit’ha]                                                 
                                                                                    
          107) itiyílš hihúkitháh                                                   
                                                                                    
               itiyilš hi-hu-kit-hah                                                
                                                                                    
               moon 1SSTATS-see-PROG(SG)-NEG                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘I do not see the moon.’ (1932:156:1)                                
                                                                                    
               [Taneˊ-u cakinaˊ-uc koˊxcaˊhulat]                                    
                                                                                    
          108) tannéw šakináwškóhššáhulat                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               tan-hew        šak-inawš-kohš-hah-ul-at                              
                                                                                    
               other-PL       3PLOBJ-enter-DESID-NEG-3PLS-PRET                      
                                                                                    
               ‘They did not want other people to enter.’ (1932:18:117)             
                                                                                    
               [Iˊcak capiˊxk caklaˊwiulhahat]                                      
                                                                                    
          109) išà·k šappíhk šakláwiulháhat                                         
                                                                                    
               iša·k     šak-pihk-ø     šak-lawi-ul-hah-at                          
                                                                                    
               person    PL-die(pl)-ABS 3PLOBJ-BURN-3PLS-NEG-PRET                   
                                                                                    
               ‘They did not burn the dead.’ (1932:19:140)                          
                                                                                    
          An interesting feature of Atakapa is the existence of suppletive negation. Three common verbs,
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ké ‘to have,’ kóh, ‘to want’ and úhc ‘to be able’ have suppletive negatives: háhš ‘not to have,’
                                                                                    
          óŋš ‘not to want; not to like,’ and áwš ‘not to be able.’ All three verbs are inflected as statives in
                                                                                    
          the aorist mode. In the following three pairs of examples, the first of the pair illustrates the
                                                                                    
          positive verb; the second illustrates the suppletive negative verb.       
                                                                                    
               [Ickiciˊl nīt keˊat]                                                 
                                                                                    
          110) iškišíl ní·t kéat                                                    
                                                                                    
               iškišil   ni·t ø-ke-at                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         71                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               daughter  five 3STATS-have-PRET                                      
                                                                                    
               ‘He had five daughters.’ (1932:16:97)                                
                                                                                    
               [wi kauˊkau ihāˊc]                                                   
                                                                                    
          111) wi kawkáw hiháhš                                                     
                                                                                    
               wi   kawkaw    hi-hahš                                               
                                                                                    
               I    water     1SSTATS-not.have                                      
                                                                                    
               ‘I do not have water.’ (1932:58:1)                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Caktaˊlko Yuk’hiˊti icaˊk kaˊ-u haˊtalkoˊat]                        
                                                                                    
          112) šaktálkoh yukhíti išá·k káw ha tal kóhat                             
                                                                                    
               šak-tal-koh     yukhiti  iša·k kaw ha   tal  ø-koh-at                
                                                                                    
               person-skin-wanter Indian person dead his skin 3STATS-want-PRET      
                                                                                    
               ‘The Skin-desirer wanted the skin of a dead Indian. (1932:11:32)     
                                                                                    
               [wi hitēt hioˊknă oˊñc]                                              
                                                                                    
          113) wi ité·t hiókne óŋš                                                  
                                                                                    
               wi   ite·t hi-ok-ne      ø-oŋš                                       
                                                                                    
               my   father 1SSTATS-come-GER 3STATS-not.want                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘My father does not want me to come.’ (1932:43:1)                    
                                                                                    
               [Cok heˊ-u cakwaˊnts uˊxtsăt]                                        
                                                                                    
          114) šokhéw šakwánc úhcat                                                 
                                                                                    
               šok-hew   šak-wanc  ø-uhc-at                                         
                                                                                    
               thing-many 3PLO-tell 3STATS-be.able-PRET                             
                                                                                    
               ‘She was able to tell them many things.’ (1932:15:84)                
                                                                                    
               [nimaˊkoˊx̥ c aˊ-uculat]                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         72                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          115) nimákóhš áwšulat                                                     
                                                                                    
               nima-kohš ø-awš-ul-at                                                
                                                                                    
               kill-DESID 3STATS-not.be.able-3PLS-PRET                              
                                                                                    
               ‘They wanted to kill him and were not able to.’ (1932:91:2)          
                                                                                    
          While there is no alternative form of negation for ké, there are occasional examples of normal
                                                                                    
          negation of kóh. For the verb úhc, the suppletive negative is used for the meaning ‘not to be able
                                                                                    
          to do,’ while the normal negative means ‘not to know.’                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [coˊk co heˊ-ux̥ tsaˊ]                                               
                                                                                    
          116) šókšo hiùhccáh                                                       
                                                                                    
               šokšo     hi-uhc-hah                                                 
                                                                                    
               anything  1SSTATS-know-NEG                                           
                                                                                    
               ‘I don’t know anything.’ (1932:138:2)                                
                                                                                    
          A negative imperative is formed by suffixing -háhš or -háhš-n̥ to the verb.
                                                                                    
               {shiwán tsúm háχsh ntsá-ĕhĕ}                                         
                                                                                    
          117) šiwán cúmháhš n̥cáwehe                                               
                                                                                    
               šiwan cum-hahš-ø    n̥-ø-caw-ehe                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               cat  pinch-NEG-2SIMP 2SOBJ-3STATS-bite-DUB                           
                                                                                    
               ‘Don’t pinch the cat, or she might bite you.’ (Gatschet 1885b:41)    
                                                                                    
               {hál wáng háχshn ól ishtiwē ṓk}                                     
                                                                                    
          118) hál wáŋháhšn̥ ó·l ištiwé·ók                                          
                                                                                    
               hal       waŋ-hahš-n̥    o·l  iš-tiwe·-ok-ø                          
                                                                                    
               behind    go.about-NEG-2SIMP near 1PLSTATS-be.with-come-2SIMP        
                                                                                    
               ‘Do not walk behind; come near with us!’ (Gatschet 1885b:49)         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         73                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [iˊuc haˊxcin]                                                       
                                                                                    
          119) íwšháhšn̥                                                            
                                                                                    
               iwš-hahš-n̥                                                          
                                                                                    
               be.angry                                                             
                                                                                    
               ‘Don’t be angry!’ (1932:54:2)                                        
                                                                                    
          Aspect suffixes. These are composed of -hán ‘almost’ -háŋš ‘completive’ -kóh/-kóhš
                                                                                    
          ‘desiderative’ -n̥t- ‘continuative,’ -n̥st ‘customarily,’ –ins/-inso ‘habitually.’ -tán + negative
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ‘before.’ and -tíhi- ‘past progressive.’ All of these suffixes, with the exception of -tán and -tíhi,
                                                                                    
          co-occur with the preterite suffix -at. Given the widespread Atakapa construction of two verbs
                                                                                    
          with the same subject and whose action is occurring at the same time being compounded without
                                                                                    
          additional morphology, these suffixes are clearly, sometimes obviously, independent verbs that
                                                                                    
          have been attracted to the verb stem.                                     
                                                                                    
          Almost. The suffix -hán is attached directly to the verb root of the preterite mode. It is derived
                                                                                    
          from the verb hán ‘to fail to do something.’ The third-person plural suffix -ul and the preterite
                                                                                    
          suffix -at follow it. It indicates that the action of the verb almost, but not quite, took place.
                                                                                    
               [Haˊ hilaˊ-i cok’hēˊc yaˊ kaˊ-u haˊnĕt]                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          120) ha hiláy šoké·šya káwhánat                                           
                                                                                    
               ha   hilay šoke·š=ya ø-kaw-han-at                                    
                                                                                    
               his  wife be.sick=and 3STATS-die(sg)-ALMOST                          
                                                                                    
               ‘His wife was sick and almost died.’ (1932:13:54-55)                 
                                                                                    
               [wi cocoˊlc hinteˊhi hăˊnulet]                                       
                                                                                    
          121) wi šošólšhin̥téhihánulat                                             
                                                                                    
               wi   šošolš-hi-n̥tehi-han-ul-at                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         74                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               I    scare(sg)-1SOBJ-frighten-ALMOST-3PLS-PRET                       
                                                                                    
               ‘They scared and almost frightened me.’ (1932:93:2)                  
                                                                                    
          Completion. This suffix -háŋš also is attached directly to the verb root. Although rare, it is
                                                                                    
          found in the aorist, subordinate and progressive modes. It is related to the independent verb háŋ
                                                                                    
          ‘to fail.’                                                                
                                                                                    
               [ekuˊn (aiˊkun) hatlacxaˊñco]                                        
                                                                                    
          122) eykún hatlašháŋšo                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               eykun     hat-laš-haŋš-o                                             
                                                                                    
               just.now  REFLEX-shave-COMPL-1SS                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘I am just now finished shaving.’ (Aorist) (1932:75:2)               
                                                                                    
               [cukaˊ hāˊñctin imōˊculat]                                           
                                                                                    
          123) šoká·kháŋštin himó·šulat                                             
                                                                                    
               šoka·k-haŋš-ti-n              himo·š-ul-at                           
                                                                                    
               ceremonial.dance-COMPL-PSTPROG-WHEN bury-3PLS-PRET                   
                                                                                    
               ‘When they had finished dancing, they buried him.’ (Subordinate) (1932:18:124-25)
                                                                                    
               [hokināˊdc haˊñckit]                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          124) hokinácháŋškit                                                       
                                                                                    
               hok-ø-inac-haŋš-kit                                                  
                                                                                    
               RECIP-3STATS-fight-COMPL-PROG                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘They are completing fighting with each other. (Progressive) (1932:86:1)
                                                                                    
          Desiderative. This is formed by suffixing -koh, which is the verb ‘to want,’ and inflecting the
                                                                                    
          entire compound with the stative subject prefixes. The desiderative seems to be used to express
                                                                                    
          a generalized or habitual desire, and is only fully distinctive in the first and second persons. The
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         75                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          following example shows the morphological distinction between a double-verb construction with
                                                                                    
          the verb ‘to want’ and the desiderative.                                  
                                                                                    
               [yukiˊt cokiaˊ ickoˊ]                                                
                                                                                    
          125a) yukít šokyáh iškóh                                                  
                                                                                    
               yukit šok-yah  iš-koh                                                
                                                                                    
               we   STH-eat   1PLSTATS-want                                         
                                                                                    
               ‘We want something to eat.’ (1932:152:2)                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [yukiˊt iccukiáˊ-ikoˊ]                                               
                                                                                    
          125b) yukít iššokyáhkóh                                                   
                                                                                    
               yukit iš-šok-yah-koh                                                 
                                                                                    
               we   1PLSTATS-STH-eat-DESID                                          
                                                                                    
               ‘We want to eat something.’ (1932:152:2)                             
                                                                                    
          Despite the existence of the construction using the independent verb kóh ‘to want,’ the
                                                                                    
          desiderative is the primary method used in the texts and the elicited examples to express the
                                                                                    
          notion of wanting to do something. In the texts the form of the desiderative is usually -koh,
                                                                                    
          while in the elicited examples, it is occasionally -kohš, which is the form of the verb ‘to want’
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          used with nominal objects.                                                
                                                                                    
               [Pa-i aˊkc tiˊc koˊhat]                                              
                                                                                    
          126) payákš tíškóhat                                                      
                                                                                    
               payakš    ø-tiš-koh-at                                               
                                                                                    
               back      3STATS-go-DESID-PRET                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘She wanted to go back.’ (1932:17:110)                               
                                                                                    
               [Kic moˊkat yaˊ yoˊlĕt kitsāk kaˊ-u yaˊ waˊñ-cakpaˊmkoh yaˊ cak’heˊ-uc]
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         76                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          127) kiš mókatya yó·lat; kicá·k káwya wáŋšakpámkóhya šakhéwš              
                                                                                    
               kiš       ø-mok-at=ya         ø-yo·l-at                kica·k        
                                                                                    
               woman     3STATS-be.short-PRET=and 3STATS-be.ill.tempered-PRET       
                                                                                    
               whiskey                                                              
                                                                                    
               ø-kaw=ya       ø-waŋ-šak-pam-koh=ya               šak-hewš           
                                                                                    
               3STATS-die(sg)=and 3STATS-go.about-3PLOBJ-beat-DESID=and 3PLOBJ-curse
                                                                                    
               ‘She was a short woman and an ill-tempered one; she got drunk and wanted to
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               go about beating people and cursing them.’ (1932:15:78-80)           
                                                                                    
               [Taneˊ-u cakinaˊ-uc koˊxcaˊhulat]                                    
                                                                                    
          128) tannéw šakináwškóhšáhulat                                            
                                                                                    
               tan-hew        šak-inawš-kohš-hah-ul-at                              
                                                                                    
               other-PL       3STATS-enter-DESID-NEG-3PLS-PRET                      
                                                                                    
               ‘They did not want other people to enter.’ (1932:18:117)             
                                                                                    
               [wi nuˊñ uˊt paˊi hitiˊc ko]                                         
                                                                                    
          129) wi núŋut payhitíškóh                                                 
                                                                                    
               wi   nuŋ-ut    pay-hi-tiš-koh                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               my   village-DIR back-1SSTATS-go-DESID                               
                                                                                    
               ‘I want to go back to my village.’ (1932:94:2)                       
                                                                                    
               [hikuˊ wi nuˊk tiˊk iˊka koˊ]                                        
                                                                                    
          130) hikú wi núk tikhikàkóh                                               
                                                                                    
               hiku wi   nuk  tik-hi-ka-koh                                         
                                                                                    
               soup I    self go.and-1SSTATS-make-DESID                             
                                                                                    
               ‘I myself want to go and make soup.’ (1932:41:1)                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         77                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [hin cokiaˊx koˊxca]                                                 
                                                                                    
          131) nšokyáhkóhš á                                                        
                                                                                    
               n-šok-yah-kohš      a                                                
                                                                                    
               2SSTATS-STH-eat-DESID Q                                              
                                                                                    
               ‘Do you want to eat something?’ (1932:152:1)                         
                                                                                    
          Another difference between the desiderative and the independent verb koh, is that while the
                                                                                    
          negative of koh is usually óŋš ‘not to want’ the negative desiderative is formed by suffixing –
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          háhš to the positive.                                                     
                                                                                    
               {hin shokiáχ kóχsh hā́χsh <a>}                                       
                                                                                    
          132) nšokyáhkóhšháhš á                                                    
                                                                                    
               n-šokyah-kohš-hahš  a                                                
                                                                                    
               2SSTATS-eat-DESID-NEG Q                                              
                                                                                    
               ‘Don’t you want to eat?’ (Gatschet, 1885b:64)                        
                                                                                    
          Continuative. This aspect is marked by the suffix -n̥t-, which never occurs in word-final
                                                                                    
          position. The suffix is bisyllabic, with n̥ being the syllabic nasal. Use of this suffix indicates that
                                                                                    
          the action keeps on going on without a set beginning or ending. Examples are fund in both the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          aorist and preterite modes.                                               
                                                                                    
               [kuˊlke hokteweˊ toˊxntsȏl]                                          
                                                                                    
          133) kúlke hoktiwé·tóhn̥ccel                                              
                                                                                    
               kúlke     hok-tiwe·-toh-n̥t-cel                                      
                                                                                    
               always    RECIP-be.with-live(pl)-CONTIN-1PLS                         
                                                                                    
               ‘We have always lived with one another.’ (1932:133:2)                
                                                                                    
               [to (h)okwaˊlcntsĕl]                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         78                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          134) tawhokwálšn̥tcel                                                     
                                                                                    
               taw-hok-walš-n̥t-cel                                                 
                                                                                    
               STAND-RECIP-fan-CONTIN-1PLS                                          
                                                                                    
               ‘We are continuing to fan each other standing.’ (1932:141:1)         
                                                                                    
               [kaukaˊ-u aˊm’n aˊnike ntaˊhĕntat]                                   
                                                                                    
          135) kawkáw ámn̥ ánike n̥táhn̥ tat                                        
                                                                                    
               kawkaw    ø-am-n̥        an-ike    n̥tah-n̥t-at                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               water     3STATS-drink-WHEN ear-ELL come.out-CONTIN-PRET             
                                                                                    
               ‘When he drank water, it kept on coming out of his ears. (1932:10:19-20)
                                                                                    
               [Yaˊñ kēˊtntat yukiˊts tuˊl ma inoˊ-i icitsyuˊtskin]                 
                                                                                    
          136) iyáŋ ké·tn̥tat yukíts túl maynóy išicyúckin                          
                                                                                    
               iyaŋ ø-ke·t-n̥t-at       yukit-š   tul  maynoy                       
                                                                                    
               there 3STATS-dwell-CONTIN-PRET we-FOC lake other.side                
                                                                                    
               iš-icyuc-kin                                                         
                                                                                    
               1PLSTATS-grow.up-WHEN                                                
                                                                                    
               ‘There she used to dwell while we grew up on the other side of the lake.’ (1932:14:72-73)
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Future Continuative. The continuative suffix -n̥t- is part of a very commonly elicited but
                                                                                    
          difficult to interpret construction. In about half of the examples, the construction consists of -n̥t-
                                                                                    
          plus -o·; in the other half of the examples it consists of the string -ki-n̥t-o·. The long o, as it is
                                                                                    
          never accented, loses its length due to the process of phonetic weakening. The construction is
                                                                                    
          translated in Gatschet and Swanton as a present, present progressive, or future. There are no
                                                                                    
          examples with plural subjects, and the vast majority of examples have first person singular
                                                                                    
          subjects. All examples, including the non-first person ones, terminate in -o, so this cannot be the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         79                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          first-person singular suffix of the aorist, but must be the phrase-terminal marker -o· (see
                                                                                    
          discussion below). The difference between -nt-o· and -ki-nt-o· is not clear, although verbal
                                                                                    
          semantics seems to play a part: for example the verbs tá·t ‘to stand,’ and ké·t ‘to sit,’ are only
                                                                                    
          found with -nt-o·, as are the verbs láš ‘to shave someone,’ and wálš ‘to fan someone.’ The suffix
                                                                                    
          string -ki-nt-o· is found exclusively with yáh ‘to eat,’ and wáŋ ‘to go about.’ The verbs yúlš ‘to
                                                                                    
          write’ and píš ‘to twist,’ occur with both. The majority of the examples of this construction lack
                                                                                    
          an overt noun or pronoun subject, so the subject must be determined from context. The
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          examples of this construction that occur in sentences suggest that its semantics are those of a
                                                                                    
          present or future continuative. Example 137a is glossed with example 137b, showing that the
                                                                                    
          meaning is close to that of the aorist mode.                              
                                                                                    
               [wic māˊñut waˊnkinto]                                               
                                                                                    
          137a) wí·š máŋot wáŋkinto                                                 
                                                                                    
               wi-iš maŋot    waŋ-ki-nt-o·                                          
                                                                                    
               I-FOC all.the.time go.about-FC-CONT-PHR.TERM                         
                                                                                    
               ‘I will walk all the time.’ (1932:142:2)                             
                                                                                    
               [wic maˊñ oˊt waˊño]                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          137b) wí·š máŋot wáŋo                                                     
                                                                                    
               wi-iš maŋot    waŋ-o                                                 
                                                                                    
               I-FOC all.the.time go.about-1SS                                      
                                                                                    
               ‘I will walk all the time.’ (1932:142:2)                             
                                                                                    
               [kic yiˊlĕn yuk’hiˊti koˊ-into]                                      
                                                                                    
          138) kíš yíln̥ yukhíti kóyn̥to                                            
                                                                                    
               kiš       yiln̥     yukhiti   koy-n̥ t-o·                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         80                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               woman     tomorrow  Indian    speak-CONTIN-PHR.TERM                  
                                                                                    
               ‘The woman will be speaking Atakapa tomorrow.’ (1932:68:2)           
                                                                                    
               [keˊucux̥ kinto naˊkc ke-uciuˊlkinto]                                
                                                                                    
          139) kewƛúkškinto ná·kš kewyúlškinto                                      
                                                                                    
               kew-ƛukš-ki-nt-o·             na-ik-iš                               
                                                                                    
               SIT-smoke.tobacco-FC-CONTIN-PHR:TERM you(sg)-ERG.AGNT-FOC            
                                                                                    
               kew-yulš-ki-nt-o·                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               SIT-write-FC-CONTIN-PHR.TERM                                         
                                                                                    
               ‘I will sit and smoke. You will sit and write.’ (1932:159:1)         
                                                                                    
               [wi noˊmc tsīk cakitsyutsickinto]                                    
                                                                                    
          140) wi nómš cí·k šakicyúciškin̥ to                                       
                                                                                    
               wi   nomš ci·k šak-icyuc-iš-ki-n̥t-o·                                
                                                                                    
               my   child two 3PLO-raise-CAUS-FC-CONTIN-PHR.TERM                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I am in the process of raising my two children.’ (1932:93:1)        
                                                                                    
               [wic caˊ ot keˊ-u cakiuˊlckinto]                                     
                                                                                    
          141) wí·š šáot kewšakyúlškin̥ to                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               wi-iš ša-ot         kew-šak-yulš-ki-n̥ t-o·                          
                                                                                    
               I-FOC someone-DIR   SIT-3PLO-write-FC-CONTIN-PHR.TERM                
                                                                                    
               ‘I am going to be sitting and writing things for someone.’ (1932:160:1)
                                                                                    
          Customary. This suffix, -n̥št, which surfaces phonetically as -n̥st, seems semantically very
                                                                                    
          similar to the Habitual, Continuative, and the Past Progressive, with the latter of which it
                                                                                    
          sometimes co-occurs, as in example 143. Note that overt marking of the subject of those verbs
                                                                                    
          which use the customary affix is blocked, and the subject must be inferred from context.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         81                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [tuˊl ōˊci nūˊn nultiˊhinst]                                         
                                                                                    
          142) túl o·ši nuŋnúltíhin̥st                                              
                                                                                    
               tul  o·ši      nuŋ-nul-tihi-n̥st                                     
                                                                                    
               lake edge.of   village-dwell(pl)-PST.PROG-CUSTOM                     
                                                                                    
               ‘They customarily lived in villages on the edges of the lakes.’ (1932:9:2-3)
                                                                                    
               [nec hicoˊmckin yuk’hiˊti tulip lōˊx̥ kin iwāˊt’n hūˊnst]            
                                                                                    
          143) neš hišómškin yukhíti túlip lókkin iwá·tn húnst                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               neš  hišomš-kin yukhiti  tul-ip    lok-kin   iwa·t-n̥                
                                                                                    
               tree small-LOC Indian    lake-INESS prairie-LOC move.hither-WHEN     
                                                                                    
               hu-n̥št                                                              
                                                                                    
               see-CUSTOM                                                           
                                                                                    
               ‘They customarily see it (the Skin-Desirer) in the brush around Lake Prien (Indian
                                                                                    
               Lake), when it moves towards them in the prairie.’ (1932:11:35)      
                                                                                    
               [Hukēˊt hakīˊt uˊts cakitoˊlcĕnst aˊn cakitoˊlcĕnst ahenaˊka uˊts cakiwiˊlĕnst]
                                                                                    
          144) oké·t hakít úc šakitólšn̥st án šakitóln̥st ahinákka úc šakiwíln̥st   
                                                                                    
               oke·t hakit uc šak-itolš-n̥št      an   šak-itolš-n̥št               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               mother their nose 3PLO-arrange-CUSTOM ear 3PLO-arrange-CUSTOM        
                                                                                    
               ahinakka  uc   šak-iwil-n̥št                                         
                                                                                    
               how       nose 3PLO-put.in.order-CUSTOM                              
                                                                                    
               ‘The mothers customarily arranged their noses, and they arranged their ears how
                                                                                    
               they customarily put the noses in order.’ (1932:12:38-39)            
                                                                                    
               [puˊmudl naˊ-u haˊkit icaˊtip hatnaˊ-inst? hatiˊdsom]                
                                                                                    
          145) púmuƛ náw hakit išá·tip hatnáwn̥st hathícam                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         82                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               pum-ul-h       naw       hakit iša·t-ip hat-naw-n̥št                 
                                                                                    
               dance-3PLS-TOP feather   they head-INESS REFLEX-put-CUSTOM           
                                                                                    
               hat-hicam                                                            
                                                                                    
               REFLEX-join.together                                                 
                                                                                    
               ‘They dance, and they customarily put feathers together on their heads.’ (1932:10:25-26)
                                                                                    
          Habitual. This suffix was explained by Gatschet only in his field notes (1885c:[7]); its meaning
                                                                                    
          is not discussed in the publication. It has two forms –inš and –inšo; (and variants –ins and –inso,
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          with the customary depalatalization of š after n) and seems closely related to the customary
                                                                                    
          suffix –n̥st. The optional final –o seems to be the same phrase-terminal marker that is found in
                                                                                    
          the continuative construction –nt-o / -ki-nt-o above. The few paradigmatic examples suggest
                                                                                    
          that this suffix is part of the subordinate mode. The following are examples:
                                                                                    
               [Moˊyu[m] kimāt tso-oˊts konăˊn olōˊl hihulat yaˊ-ins(o)]            
                                                                                    
          146) móyu kimá·t còhoc konán ólo·l híhulat yáhins (K) / yáhinso (T)       
                                                                                    
               moyu      kima·t    cohoc     konan ol,ol    hiš-ul-at               
                                                                                    
               pumpkin   beans     maize     potato REDUP,sweet plant-3PLS-PRET     
                                                                                    
               ø-yah-ins-o·                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               3S-eat-HABIT-PHR.TERM                                                
                                                                                    
               ‘They plant and habitually eat pumpkins, beans, maize, and sweet potatoes.’ (1932:9:4-5)
                                                                                    
               {yukít ish yá-insho}                                                 
                                                                                    
          147) yukít išyáhinšo                                                      
                                                                                    
               yukít iš-yáh-inš-o·                                                  
                                                                                    
               we   1plstats-eat-HABIT-PHR.TERM                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘We habitually eat it.’ (Gatschet, 1885c:[7])                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         83                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               {nakit nak yá-insh}                                                  
                                                                                    
          148) nakít nakyáhinš                                                      
                                                                                    
               nakít     nak-yáh-inš                                                
                                                                                    
               you(pl)   2PLSTATS-eat-HABIT                                         
                                                                                    
               ‘You all habitually eat it.’ (Gatschet, 1885c:[7])                   
                                                                                    
               [wi hicoxkoˊ-ins iluˊ nit]                                           
                                                                                    
          149) wí hišokóyins ilú ní·t                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               wi   hi-šokoy-inš        ilu  ni·t                                   
                                                                                    
               I    1SSTATS-be.chief.-HABIT year five                               
                                                                                    
               ‘I have been a chief for five years.’ (1932:69:2)                    
                                                                                    
          Before. The aspectual element -tán is derived from the verb tán ‘to be still; to be yet.’ This
                                                                                    
          element is unique in that it must be suffixed to a verb in the negative. The expression of the
                                                                                    
          concept of ‘before’ with a negative construction is widespread in the Southeast, found in Koasati,
                                                                                    
          Natchez, and Chitimacha.11                                                
                                                                                    
               [Tik’huˊ koˊhat kaˊ-u hāˊxc taˊn, tiˊc aˊ-ucat]                      
                                                                                    
          150) tikhúkóhat káwháhštán tíš áwšat                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               tik-ø-hu-koh-at          ø-kaw-hahš-tan tiš                          
                                                                                    
               GO.AND-3STATS-see-DESID-PRET 3STATS-die-NEG-YET go                   
                                                                                    
               ø-awš-at                                                             
                                                                                    
               3STATS-not.be.able-PRET                                              
                                                                                    
               ‘She wanted to go and see him before he died, but she was unable to go.’
                                                                                    
               (1932:17:105-06)                                                     
                                                                                    
               [kĕlakwaˊts kaˊ-uc maka-u haˊxcta]                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         84                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          151) kelakwác káwš makáwháhštán                                           
                                                                                    
               kelakwac  kawš      ø-makaw-hahš-tan                                 
                                                                                    
               bottle    stopper   3STATS-fall(sg)-NEG-YET                          
                                                                                    
               ‘before the bottle stopper falls in’ (1932:78:2)                     
                                                                                    
               [hokinaˊdsul haˊx̥ ctan]                                             
                                                                                    
          152) hokináculháhštán                                                     
                                                                                    
               hok-inac-ul-hahš-tan                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               RECIP-fight-3PLS-NEG-YET                                             
                                                                                    
               ‘before they fight’ (1932:86:1)                                      
                                                                                    
               [tsuˊmc haˊx̥ cta]                                                   
                                                                                    
          153) cúmšháhštán                                                          
                                                                                    
               cumš-ø-hahš-tan                                                      
                                                                                    
               pinch-3S-NEG-YET                                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘before he pinches him’ (1932:34:2)                                  
                                                                                    
          Past Progressive. The rare affix -tíhi- (unaccented form -ti-) occurs only in texts, and is never
                                                                                    
          word-final. This seems to be the equivalent of the progressive mode, only with the action taking
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          place in the past. This suffix also does not co-occur with subject affixes; the subject has to be
                                                                                    
          understood from context.                                                  
                                                                                    
               [Yuk’hiˊti icāk wāci a nēp nūn nultiˊhinst]                          
                                                                                    
          154) yukhíti išá·k wáši a né·p nuŋnúltíhin̥st                             
                                                                                    
               yukhiti   iša·k     waši a    ne·-ip                                 
                                                                                    
               Indian    people    old  this land-INESS                             
                                                                                    
               nuŋ-nul-tihi-n̥st                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         85                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               village-live-PST.PROG-CUSTOM                                         
                                                                                    
               ‘The old Indian people customarily used to live in villages in this land.’ (1932:9:1)
                                                                                    
               [tuˊl ōˊci nūn nultiˊhinst]                                          
                                                                                    
          155) túl ó·ši nuŋnúltíhin̥st                                              
                                                                                    
               tul  o·ši      nuŋ-nul-tihi-̥nst                                     
                                                                                    
               lake edge.of   village-live-PST.PROG-CUSTOM                          
                                                                                    
               ‘They customarily lived in villages on the edges of the lakes.’ (1932:9:1-2)
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Icāˊt atyĕˊnē laklaˊkc koˊpik kaˊ wine-ulat Yuk’hiˊti Tuˊl hikiˊ inoˊ nē huˊ-i
                                                                                    
          156) iša·thatyíncne laklákškópik ká winéulat yukhíti túl hikí inó né· húy 
                                                                                    
               iwaˊlkin nuˊl taˊmtin nec-kīñc taˊmc anˊ nuˊl kaˊtin payāˊkc imōˊculat]
                                                                                    
               iwálkin núl támtin neškiŋštámšaŋ núl kátin payákš himó·šulat         
                                                                                    
               iša·thatyincne laklakškop-ik  ka   wine-ul-at     yukhiti            
                                                                                    
               crown          silver-ERG.INSTR make find-3PLS-PRET Indian           
                                                                                    
               tul  hiki ino  ne·       huy       iwal-kin  nul                     
                                                                                    
               lake west side ground    under     shells-LOC foundation             
                                                                                    
               tam-ti-n       neškiŋštamšaŋ  nul       ka-ti-n                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               dig-PST.PROG-WHEN sawmill     foundation make-PST.PROG-WHEN          
                                                                                    
               payakš    himo·š-ul-at                                               
                                                                                    
               again     bury-3PLS-PRET                                             
                                                                                    
               ‘They found a crown made of silver on the west side of Lake Prien (Indian Lake),
                                                                                    
               under the ground in the shells, when they were digging a foundation, when they
                                                                                    
               were making the sawmill’s foundation, and they buried it again.’ (1932:19:133-36)
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         86                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          The phrase-terminal marker. The suffix -o· is called a phrase-terminal marker more from its
                                                                                    
          position than from any discernable semantics. The meaning of this suffix which occurs
                                                                                    
          occasionally in texts and elicited sentences, is difficult to pin down. It is most commonly found
                                                                                    
          in the construction with the continuative, as discussed above. This suffix, unlike the first person
                                                                                    
          singular subject suffix of the aorist, -o, never is written [u] even though it is never accented.
                                                                                    
          This suggests that this suffix has an underlying long vowel, and thus is actually -o·. Although
                                                                                    
          there is no definite meaning that can be assigned to this suffix, as it always occurs on the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          terminal verb of a sentence, it is here termed a phrase-terminal marker.  
                                                                                    
               [Hatiuˊlco ‘n‘oˊhik]                                                 
                                                                                    
          157) hatyúlšo n̥hóhik                                                     
                                                                                    
               hat-yulš-ø-o·       n̥hoh-ik                                         
                                                                                    
               REFLEX-mark-3S-PHR.TERM face.paint-ERG.INSTR                         
                                                                                    
               ‘They mark themselves with face paint. (1932:10:24)                  
                                                                                    
               [cakatkoˊpcĕn hatmēˊlco]                                             
                                                                                    
          158) šakhatkópšn̥ hatmé·lšo                                               
                                                                                    
               šak-hat-kop-š-n̥              hat-me·l-š-ø-o·                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               3PLSTATS-REFLEX-be.white-CAUS-WHEN REFLEX-be.black-CAUS-3S-PHR.TERM  
                                                                                    
               ‘When they paint themselves white, they paint themselves black.’ (1932:10:24-25)
                                                                                    
               [hakīt icaˊk kaˊ-u hatmēˊlco]                                        
                                                                                    
          159) hakít iša·k káw[ot] hatmé·lšo                                        
                                                                                    
               hakit iša·k    kaw-ot    hat-me·l-š-ø-o·                             
                                                                                    
               their person   dead-DIR  REFLEX-be.black-CAUS-3S-PHR.TERM            
                                                                                    
               ‘They paint themselves black for their dead relative.’ (1932:10:25)  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         87                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [haˊik himico]                                                       
                                                                                    
          160) háik himíšo                                                          
                                                                                    
               ha-ik          hi-miš-ø-o·                                           
                                                                                    
               s/he-ERG.AGNT  1SO-give-3S-PHR.TERM                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘He gives it to me.’ (1932:80:2)                                     
                                                                                    
          Verbal Prefixes. In contrast to verbal suffixes, which are not rigidly bound in order after the
                                                                                    
          verb root, verbal prefixes have a fixed order:                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                        R           
                                                                                    
          Directional – Incorp. – Indefinite – Second – First – Third person – Reflexive / – O
                                                                                    
          Locational Noun  Object   Person  Person Plural Object Reciprocal O       
                                                                                    
                                                                        T           
                                                                                    
          Verbal Object Prefixes. In the position closest to the root are the prefixes hat- reflexive, and
                                                                                    
          hok- reciprocal.                                                          
                                                                                    
          Reflexive. The reflexive prefix indicates that the action of the verb is being done to its subject.
                                                                                    
               [wi uˊts hatsaˊkco]                                                  
                                                                                    
          161) wi úc haccákšo                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               wi   uc   hat-cakš-o                                                 
                                                                                    
               my   nose REFLEX-dry-1SS                                             
                                                                                    
               ‘I wipe my nose.’ (1932:139:2)                                       
                                                                                    
               [puˊmudl naˊ-u haˊkit icaˊtip hatnaˊ-inst? hatiˊdsom]                
                                                                                    
          162) púmuƛ náw hakìt išá·tip hatnáwnst hathícam                           
                                                                                    
               pum-ul-h       naw       hakit iša·t-ip hat-naw-nst                  
                                                                                    
               dance-3PLS-TOP feather   they head-INESS REFLEX-put-CUSTOM           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         88                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               hat-hicam                                                            
                                                                                    
               REFLEX-join.together                                                 
                                                                                    
               ‘They dance, and they customarily put feathers together on their heads.’ (1932:10:25-26)
                                                                                    
               [ekuˊn (aiˊkun) hatlacxaˊñco]                                        
                                                                                    
          163) eykún hatlašháŋšo                                                    
                                                                                    
               eykun     hat-laš-haŋš-o                                             
                                                                                    
               just.now  REFLEX-shave-COMPL-1SS                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I am just now finished shaving.’ (Aorist) (1932:75:2)               
                                                                                    
               [Yukiˊti o-inaˊka (h)atitōˊlc haˊhat]                                
                                                                                    
          164) yukhíti ahinákka hatitólšháhat                                       
                                                                                    
               yukhiti   ahinakka  hat-ø-itolš-hah-at                               
                                                                                    
               Indian    like      REFLEX-3STATS-dress-NEG-PRET                     
                                                                                    
               ‘She did not dress herself like an Indian.’ (1932:15:77)             
                                                                                    
               [tolhoˊpcik hiatkaˊucat]                                             
                                                                                    
          165) tolhópšik hihatkáwšat                                                
                                                                                    
               tolhopš-ik     hi-hat-kawš-at                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               needle-ERG.INSTR 1SSTATS-REFLEX-prick-PRET                           
                                                                                    
               ‘I pricked myself with a needle.’ (1932:134:2)                       
                                                                                    
          The reflexive prefix also indicates an indirect object as well as a direct object
                                                                                    
               {okotkámsh hatpátsisho}                                              
                                                                                    
          166) okotkámš hatpácišo                                                   
                                                                                    
               okotkamš  hat-paciš-o                                                
                                                                                    
               shirt(pl) REFLEX-wash-1SS                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         89                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I wash shirts for myself.’ (Gatschet 1885b:133)                     
                                                                                    
          The reflexive prefix is an inseparable part of several verbs which describe mental activity.
                                                                                    
               {tá-u hatwënënto otsotā́tōt}                                         
                                                                                    
          167) tawhatwénn̥to ocotá·tot                                              
                                                                                    
               taw-hat-wen-n̥t-o·            oc-ot-tá·t-ot                          
                                                                                    
               stand-REFLEX-pray-CONTIN-PHR.TERM above-DIR-stand-DIR                
                                                                                    
               ‘I am going to stand and pray to God.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:80)          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Yukiˊts icatsiˊckicat yukiˊt okēt huˊne]                            
                                                                                    
          167) yukíts iššaccíškišat yukít oké·t húne                                
                                                                                    
               yukit-š   iš-hat-ciškiš-at         yukit oke·t    hu-ne              
                                                                                    
               we-FOC    1PLSTATS-REFLEX-be:glad-PRET our mother see-GER            
                                                                                    
               ‘We were glad to see our mother.’ (1932:17:109)                      
                                                                                    
               [hiatuˊxtsat]                                                        
                                                                                    
          169) hihatúhcat                                                           
                                                                                    
               hi-hat-uhc-at                                                        
                                                                                    
               1SSTATS-REFLEX-know-PRET                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I remembered it.’ (1932:82:2)                                       
                                                                                    
               [teyoˊ hicakatse-uwaˊnĕt]                                            
                                                                                    
          170) teyóh hišakhaccewwánat                                               
                                                                                    
               teyoh hi-šak-hat-cewwan-at                                           
                                                                                    
               trunk 1SSTATS-3PLO-REFLEX-forget-PRET                                
                                                                                    
               ‘I have forgotten my trunks.’ (1932:120:2)                           
                                                                                    
               [wi h(y)atiˊtsat]                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         90                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          171) wí hihatícat                                                         
                                                                                    
               wi   hi-hat-ic-at                                                    
                                                                                    
               I    1SSTATS-REFLEX-awaken-PRET                                      
                                                                                    
               ‘I woke up.’ (1932:51:2)                                             
                                                                                    
          Reciprocal. The reciprocal prefix indicates that the subjects of a plural verb are doing the action
                                                                                    
          to each other.                                                            
                                                                                    
               [Yukiˊti mōˊne oˊk-inuˊlulat imōˊc oˊt tiˊune]                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          172) yukhíti mó·ni hokinúlulat himó·šot tíwne                             
                                                                                    
               yukhiti   mo·ni     hok-inul-ul-at      himo·š-ot tiw-ne             
                                                                                    
               Indian    all(human) RECIP-gather-3PLS-PRET burial-DIR go(pl)-GER    
                                                                                    
               ‘All the Indians gathered together to go to the burial.’ (1932:18:125-26)
                                                                                    
               [Wāˊñ-hokpēˊmkin iˊcāk cakōˊñne okcĕkiaˊlat]                         
                                                                                    
          173) wáŋhokpé·mkin iša·kšakkóŋne okšakyálat                               
                                                                                    
               waŋ-hok-ø-pe·m-kin            iša·kšakkoŋne                          
                                                                                    
               go.about-RECIP-3STATS-shoot-WHEN sheriff                             
                                                                                    
               ok-šak-ø-yal-at                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               COME.AND-3PLO-3STATS-sieze(pl)-PRET                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘When they were going about shooting at each other, the sheriff came and arrested them.’
                                                                                    
               (1932:20:147-48)                                                     
                                                                                    
          Third person plural object. The prefix marking a third-person plural object occurs in the next
                                                                                    
          leftward position. This very common prefix indicates that the object of the verb is a plural noun.
                                                                                    
          It is probably derived from iša·k ‘person,’ although it is freely used to refer to animals and
                                                                                    
          things. Very frequently, even if a nominal adjunct is expressed, the third person plural object
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         91                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          prefix is used. Note that in example 174, even though the plural verb already indicates that the
                                                                                    
          object is plural, the prefix šak- is still used.                          
                                                                                    
               [ciwaˊn nohaˊmc cakcocoˊmcat]                                        
                                                                                    
          174) šiwán nohámš šakšošómšat                                             
                                                                                    
               šiwan nohamš   šak-šošomš-ø-at                                       
                                                                                    
               cat  chicken   3PLO-scare(pl)- 3S-PRET                               
                                                                                    
               ‘The cat scared the chickens.’ (1932:112:2)                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Viˊvulat iˊcak capiˊx̥ k taneˊ-u okcak’hu-ulat]                     
                                                                                    
          175) wíwulat išà·k šappíhk tannéw okšakhúulat                             
                                                                                    
               wiw-ul-at      iša·k     šak-pihk  tan-hew                           
                                                                                    
               believe-3PLS-PRET person PL-die(pl) other-PL                         
                                                                                    
               ok-šak-hu-ul-at                                                      
                                                                                    
               come-3PLO-see-3PLS-PRET                                              
                                                                                    
               ‘They believed that other dead people came to see them.’ (1932:18:121-22)
                                                                                    
               [Haˊ cakicāk Hiyeˊkiti cakioˊñculat]                                 
                                                                                    
          176) ha šakišá·k hiyékiti šakyóŋšulat                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ha   šak-iša·k hiyekiti       šak-yoŋš-ul-at                         
                                                                                    
               her  PL-person sunrise.people 3PLO-call.by.name.-3PLS-PRET           
                                                                                    
               ‘They called her relatives the Sunrise People.’ (1932:10:31)         
                                                                                    
               [tsanuˊk tsiˊk hi(cak)aˊxlicat]                                      
                                                                                    
          177) canúk cí·k hišakáɬišat                                               
                                                                                    
               canuk     ci·k hi-šak-aƛiš-at                                        
                                                                                    
               horse     two  1SSTATS-3PLO-lose-PRET                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         92                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I lost two horses.’ (1932:119:1)                                    
                                                                                    
          The third person plural object marker is also used as a third person plural stative subject marker.
                                                                                    
          This usage seems to have arisen by analogy to the object pronouns of the other persons, which
                                                                                    
          are used as stative subject markers.                                      
                                                                                    
               [hakīt cakoñc]                                                       
                                                                                    
          178) hakít šakóŋš                                                         
                                                                                    
               hakit šak-oŋš                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               they 3PLSTATS-not.to.want                                            
                                                                                    
               ‘They do not want it.’ (1932:98:1)                                   
                                                                                    
               [keˊc ‘n cakioˊl teˊc mōñ cakmañmaˊñĕt]                              
                                                                                    
          179) kéšn šakyól té·š mo·n šakmaŋmáŋat                                    
                                                                                    
               keš=n          šakyol    te·š mo·n šak-maŋ,maŋ-at                    
                                                                                    
               woman(pl)=and  man       hair all  3PLSTATS-,REDUP,be.long-PRET      
                                                                                    
               ‘Women and men all wore their hair long.’ (1932:10:23)               
                                                                                    
          First person prefixes. These are the prefix hi- which indicates a first person singular direct or
                                                                                    
          indirect object of a transitive verb, or a first-person singular subject in the modes other than the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          aorist, and the prefix iš-, which indicates a first-person plural.        
                                                                                    
               [hiatuˊxtsat]                                                        
                                                                                    
          180) hihatúhcat                                                           
                                                                                    
               hi-hat-uhc-at                                                        
                                                                                    
               1SSTATS-REFLEX-know-PRET                                             
                                                                                    
               ‘I remembered it.’ (1932:82:2)                                       
                                                                                    
               [yukiˊt iccukiáˊ-ikoˊ]                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         93                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          181) yukít iššokyáhkóh                                                    
                                                                                    
               yukit iš-šokyah-koh                                                  
                                                                                    
               we   1PLSTATS-eat-DESID                                              
                                                                                    
               ‘We want to eat.’ (1932:152:2)                                       
                                                                                    
               {ish oktsángshět}                                                    
                                                                                    
          182) išhokcáŋšat                                                          
                                                                                    
               iš-hok-caŋš-at                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               1PLSTAT-RECIP-push-PRET                                              
                                                                                    
               ‘We pushed each other.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:13)                         
                                                                                    
          Second person prefixes. Next outward are the second person prefixes, n̥- for second-person
                                                                                    
          singular and nak- for second person plural. Note that context alone indicates whether the prefix
                                                                                    
          acts as a subject (example 183) or an object (example 184)                
                                                                                    
               [‘n hihu haˊxc aˊ]                                                   
                                                                                    
          183) n̥hihúháhš á                                                         
                                                                                    
               n̥-hi-hu-hahš  a                                                     
                                                                                    
               2SSTATS-1SO-see-NEG Q                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘Do you not see me?’ (1932:45:2)                                     
                                                                                    
               [paknaˊ-u wan năn hioˊñc]                                            
                                                                                    
          184) paknáwwánne n̥hióŋš                                                  
                                                                                    
               paknaw-waŋ-ne  n̥-hi-oŋš                                             
                                                                                    
               run-go.about-GER 2SO-1SSTATS-not.to.want                             
                                                                                    
               ‘I don’t want you to go running about.’ (1932:101:2)                 
                                                                                    
               [nak cakaˊxlecat]                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         94                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          185) nakšakáɬišat                                                         
                                                                                    
               nak-šak-aƛiš-at                                                      
                                                                                    
               2PLSTATS-3PLOBJ-lose-PRET                                            
                                                                                    
               ‘You all lost them’ (1932:13:58)                                     
                                                                                    
          Indefinite object. The next prefix, šok-, indicates that there is an object to the action of the verb,
                                                                                    
          but does not specify what it might be. It is probably derived from the independent word šók
                                                                                    
          ‘thing.’                                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [wic aˊ cokihuˊkit haˊx̥ c]                                          
                                                                                    
          186) wí·š á šokhihúkitháhš                                                
                                                                                    
               wi-iš a   šok-hi-hu-kit-hahš                                         
                                                                                    
               I-foc this sth-1SSTATS-see-PROG(SG)-NEG                              
                                                                                    
               ‘I don’t see anything.’ (1932:34:2)                                  
                                                                                    
               [cok iwaˊnts]                                                        
                                                                                    
          187) šokhiwánc                                                            
                                                                                    
               šok-hi-wanc-ø                                                        
                                                                                    
               STH-1SO-tell.to-2SIMP                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘Tell me a story!’ (1932:114:1)                                      
                                                                                    
               [wic ivīˊv há coˊx̥ ’nwaˊnkit]                                       
                                                                                    
          188) wí·š hiwíwhah šokn̥wánkit                                            
                                                                                    
               wi·š hi-wiw-hah          šok-n̥ -wan-kit                             
                                                                                    
               I-FOC 1SSTAT-believe-NEG STH-2SSTATS-say-PROG                        
                                                                                    
               ‘I do not believe anything you are saying.’ (1932:34:2)              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         95                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Incorporated nouns. There are only a few examples of incorporated nouns. They are only
                                                                                    
          noticeable when they occur after the directional and locational verbal prefixes, rather than
                                                                                    
          before.                                                                   
                                                                                    
          Examples 189a and 189b show a nominal object that is not incorporated; examples 190a and
                                                                                    
          190b show one that is.                                                    
                                                                                    
               [wi nēˊc kōˊtso]                                                     
                                                                                    
          189a) wí néš kóco                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               wi   neš  koc-o                                                      
                                                                                    
               I    wood chop-1SS                                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘I chop wood’ (1932:90:2)                                            
                                                                                    
               [neˊc keˊ-ukatskatsicnto]                                            
                                                                                    
          189b) néš kewkackácišn̥to                                                 
                                                                                    
               neš  kew-kackac-iš-n̥t-o·                                            
                                                                                    
               wood SIT-be.smooth-CAUS-CONTIN-PHR.TERM                              
                                                                                    
               ‘I am going to sit and plane some wood.’ (1932:89:2)                 
                                                                                    
               [wi okakinto]                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          190a) wí okkákinto                                                        
                                                                                    
               wi   ok=ka-ki-nt-o·                                                  
                                                                                    
               I    cloth=make-CF-CONTIN-PHR.TERM                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘I am going to weave.’ (1932:97:1)                                   
                                                                                    
               [wi keˊ-uokcokkaˊkinto]                                              
                                                                                    
          190b) wí kewokšokkákinto                                                  
                                                                                    
               wi   kew-ok-šok-ká-ki-nt-o·                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         96                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               I    SIT-cloth-STH-make-CF-CONTIN-PHR.TERM                           
                                                                                    
               ‘I am going to sit and weave things.’ ’ (1932:62:2)                  
                                                                                    
          The verb šil ‘to sew something’ incorporates the noun šok ‘thing’ to produce the intransitive verb
                                                                                    
          šokšíl ‘to be sewing.’ This is illustrated in examples 191a and 191b.     
                                                                                    
               [wi keˊ-u cukciˊkinto]                                               
                                                                                    
          191a) wí kewšokšílkinto                                                   
                                                                                    
               wi   kew-šok=šil-ki-nt-o·                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               I    SIT-thing=sew-CF-CONTIN-PHR.TERM                                
                                                                                    
               ‘I am going to sit and sew.’ (1932:112:1)                            
                                                                                    
               [wi keˊ-u cukcokciˊkinto]                                            
                                                                                    
          191b) wí kewšokšokšílkinto                                                
                                                                                    
               wi   kew-šok-šok=šil-ki-nt-o·                                        
                                                                                    
               I    SIT-thing-STH=sew-CF-CONTIN-PHR.TERM                            
                                                                                    
               ‘I am going to sit and sew things.’ (1932:112:1)                     
                                                                                    
            The noun šók is incorporated in a construction that detransitivizes a verb and creates an
                                                                                    
          antipassive. In some cases, such as šokyáh ‘to eat,’ it has become so tightly bound to the verb
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          root that it no longer separates, and has to be treated as part of the root, as in example 181 above.
                                                                                    
          Locational and directional verbal prefixes. These, the outermost set of prefixes, give further
                                                                                    
          information about the way an action is being performed. These are kew- ‘action performed
                                                                                    
          sitting,’ taw- ‘action performed standing (singular or plural),’ cow- ‘action performed standing
                                                                                    
          (plural),’ tik- ‘motion going towards an action,’ ok- ‘motion coming for an action,’ pay- ‘motion
                                                                                    
          back,’ and the rarer hiyik- ‘motion upwards,’ and ik- ‘action done with an instrument.’ There are
                                                                                    
          traces of a further prefix hik-, ‘action in water,’ for which see the discussion of Line 10 of Text 9.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         97                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Action performed sitting. This prefix, kew- is derived from the singular verb ke·t, ‘to sit; to
                                                                                    
          remain.’ It indicates that the action is performed while the subject is in a seated position. It can
                                                                                    
          be metaphorically extended to inanimate subjects which are conceived to be in a sitting position.
                                                                                    
          It is only found in elicited examples.                                    
                                                                                    
               [neˊc hidsoˊm ke-u cakuˊdskit]                                       
                                                                                    
          192) néš hicón kewšakkúckit                                               
                                                                                    
               neš  hicon     kew-šak-ø-kuc-kit                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               wood small(inan.) SIT-3PLO-3STATS-cut-PROG                           
                                                                                    
               ‘He is sitting and cutting small pieces of wood’ (1932:42:2)         
                                                                                    
               [wic keˊ-ucakiuˊlckinto]                                             
                                                                                    
          193) wí·š kewšakyúlškinto                                                 
                                                                                    
               wi-iš kew-šak-yulš-ki-nt-o·                                          
                                                                                    
               I-FOC SIT-3PLO-write-1SS-CONTIN-PHR.TERM                             
                                                                                    
               ‘I am sitting and writing to people.’ (1932:62:2)                    
                                                                                    
               [wic keˊ-utluxkco yaˊ cokiūlco]                                      
                                                                                    
          194) wí·š kewƛúkšoya šokyúlšo                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               wi-iš kew-ƛukš-o=ya           šok-yulš-o·                            
                                                                                    
               I-FOC SIT-smoke.tobacco-1SS=and STH-write-1SS                        
                                                                                    
               ‘I am sitting, smoking tobacco, and I am writing things.’ (1932:62:2)
                                                                                    
               [keceˊc keˊ-ucakwaˊlcnto]                                            
                                                                                    
          195) kešéš kewšakwálšn̥to                                                 
                                                                                    
               kešeš     kew-šak-walš-n̥t-o·                                        
                                                                                    
               girl(pl)  SIT-3PLO-fan-CONTIN-PHR.TERM                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         98                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I sit and fan the girls.’12 (1932:61:2)                             
                                                                                    
               [cokiˊc ke-uheˊtskit]                                                
                                                                                    
          196) šokhíš kewhéckit                                                     
                                                                                    
               šokhiš    kew-ø-hec-kit                                              
                                                                                    
               plant     SIT-3STATS-grow-PROG(SG)                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘The plant is growing.’ (1932:38:2)                                  
                                                                                    
          Action performed standing. The prefix for this notion, taw- is derived from ta·t ‘to stand’ by
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          the same process that derived kew- from ke·t. It indicates that an action is done standing. It is
                                                                                    
          also metaphorically extended to the actions of inanimate subjects that take place without moving
                                                                                    
          from a location. This prefix can be used with both singular and plural subjects, in contrast with
                                                                                    
          the prefix cow- which is used with plural subjects only.                  
                                                                                    
               [Tawatweˊnăt Utsutaˊt ut.]                                           
                                                                                    
          197) tawwatwénat ocottá·tot                                               
                                                                                    
               taw-hat-ø-wen-at         oc-ot-tá·t-ot                               
                                                                                    
               stand-REFLEX-3STATS-pray-PRET above-DIR-stand-DIR                    
                                                                                    
               ‘They stood and prayed to God (She-who-stands-above).’ (1932:9:14)   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [ta-ucok’koˊ-ikit]                                                   
                                                                                    
          198) tawšokkóykit                                                         
                                                                                    
               taw-šok-ø-koy-kit                                                    
                                                                                    
               STAND-STH-3STATS-say-PROG                                            
                                                                                    
               ‘He is standing and saying things, i.e. he is preaching.’ (1932:69:1)
                                                                                    
               [kaukauˊ ta-uɬoˊkit]                                                 
                                                                                    
          199) kawkáw tawłókkit                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         99                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               kawkaw    taw-ø-ƛok-kit                                              
                                                                                    
               water     STAND-3STATS-boil-PROG(SG)                                 
                                                                                    
               ‘The water is boiling (lit. is standing and boiling).’ (1932:123:1)  
                                                                                    
               [naˊ-u taˊ-u-walwaˊlctit]                                            
                                                                                    
          200) náw tawwalwálštit                                                    
                                                                                    
               naw       taw-ø-walwalš-tit                                          
                                                                                    
               feather   STAND-3STATS-wave-PROG(PL)                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘The feathers are waving (lit. are standing and waving).’ (1932:141:1)
                                                                                    
               {tá-uikíkit káukau}                                                  
                                                                                    
          201) tawikí·kkit kawkàw                                                   
                                                                                    
               taw-ø-iki·k-kit          kawkaw                                      
                                                                                    
               STAND-3STATS-drip-PROG(SG) water                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘Water is dripping (lit. is standing and dripping).’ (Gatschet, 1885b:7)
                                                                                    
          Action performed standing (plural). The prefix is cow-, which is derived from co·t ‘to stand
                                                                                    
          (plural). It is extremely uncommon, and found only in elicitation.        
                                                                                    
               [icāk tso-opiˊctit]                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          202) išá·k cowpíštit                                                      
                                                                                    
               iša·k     ø-cow-piš-tit                                              
                                                                                    
               person    3STATS-STAND(PL)-twist-PROG(PL)                            
                                                                                    
               ‘The people are standing and twisting.’ (1932:106:1)                 
                                                                                    
          Motion towards. The prefix tik- which is related to both forms of the verb ‘to go,’ (tíš, singular
                                                                                    
          and tíw, plural) indicates that the subject is in motion for the purpose of doing an action. Purpose
                                                                                    
          without motion is handled by the gerund or the participle, as mentioned above.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         100                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Tik’huˊ koˊhat kaˊ-u hāˊxc taˊn, tiˊc aˊ-ucat]                      
                                                                                    
          203) tikhúkóhat káwháhštán tíš áwšat                                      
                                                                                    
               tik-ø-hu-koh-at          ø-kaw-hahš-tan tiš                          
                                                                                    
               GO.AND-3STATS-see-DESID-PRET 3STATS-die-NEG-ASP go                   
                                                                                    
               ø-awš-at                                                             
                                                                                    
               3STATS-not.be.able-PRET                                              
                                                                                    
               ‘She wanted to go and see him before he died, but she was unable to go.’ (1932: 17:105-
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               06)                                                                  
                                                                                    
               [hikuˊ wi nuˊk tiˊk ika koˊ]                                         
                                                                                    
          204) hikú wi núk tikhikákóh                                               
                                                                                    
               hiku wi   nuk  tik-hi-ka-koh                                         
                                                                                    
               soup I    self GO.AND-1SSTATS-make-DESID                             
                                                                                    
               ‘I myself want to go and make soup.’ (1932:41:1)                     
                                                                                    
               [tik’huˊwo]                                                          
                                                                                    
          205) tikhúo                                                               
                                                                                    
               tik-hu-o                                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               GO.AND-see-1SS                                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘I am going to see someone.’ (1932:46:1)                             
                                                                                    
          Motion coming. The prefix ok- indicates motion coming for the purpose of doing an action.
                                                                                    
          This prefix is the unaccented form of the verb ók ‘to come. Note the difference between simply
                                                                                    
          coming (example 205) and coming for a purpose (example 206):              
                                                                                    
               [Yuk’hiˊti ipcōˊk oˊk yaˊpeˊneat]                                    
                                                                                    
          206) yukhíti ipšók ókya péniat                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         101                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               yukhiti   ipšok     ø-ok=ya        ø-peni-at                         
                                                                                    
               Indian    doctor    3STATS-come=and 3OBJ-cure-PRET                   
                                                                                    
               ‘The Indian doctor came and cured her.’ (1932:13:56)                 
                                                                                    
               [Viˊvulat iˊcak capiˊx̥ k taneˊ-u okcak’hu-ulat]                     
                                                                                    
          207) wíwulat išà·k šappíhk tannéw okšakhúulat                             
                                                                                    
               wiw-ul-at      iša·k     šak-pihk  tan-hew                           
                                                                                    
               believe-3PLS-PRET person PL-die(pl) other-PL                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ok-šak-hu-ul-at                                                      
                                                                                    
               COME.AND-3PLO-see-3PLS-PRET                                          
                                                                                    
               ‘They believed that other dead people came to see them.’ (1932:18:121-122)
                                                                                    
               {ók hi-úat}                                                          
                                                                                    
          208) okhihúat                                                             
                                                                                    
               ok-hi-ø-hu-at                                                        
                                                                                    
               COME.AND-1SO-3STATS-see-PRET                                         
                                                                                    
               ‘He came to see me.’ (Gatschet 1885b:87)                             
                                                                                    
          Motion back. The prefix pay- indicates that the action is being done in the direction of the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          origin of the action. It is related to the independent verb pay ‘to return.’
                                                                                    
               [wi nuˊñ uˊt paˊi hitiˊc ko]                                         
                                                                                    
          209) wi núŋot payhitíškóh                                                 
                                                                                    
               wi   nuŋ-ot    pay-hi-tiš-koh                                        
                                                                                    
               my   village-DIR BACK-1SSTATS-go-DESID                               
                                                                                    
               ‘I want to go back to my village.’ (1932:94:2)                       
                                                                                    
               [Itiˊ tanuˊkip yiˊl tūt nēn ōˊl paˊi moˊhat]                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         102                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          210) ití tanúkip yíl tútnan ó·l paymóhat                                  
                                                                                    
               ití  tanuk-ip  yil  tutnan    o·l  pay-ø-moh-at                      
                                                                                    
               night one-INESS day before    near BACK-3STATS-return-PRET           
                                                                                    
               ‘Once at night, just before daybreak, she returned back.’ (1932:17:108-09)
                                                                                    
          With verbs that refer to states, the prefix pay- has the meaning ‘too much.’
                                                                                    
               [Pa-itoˊlucat wiˊ ot]                                                
                                                                                    
          211) paytólušat wíot                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               pay-ø-tol-uš-at          wi-ot                                       
                                                                                    
               BACK-3STATS-be.good-be.true-PRET I-DIR                               
                                                                                    
               ‘He was generous to me.’ (1932:16:104)                               
                                                                                    
               [kitsāk paihe-uc ăˊmĕt]                                              
                                                                                    
          212) kicá·k payhéwš ámat                                                  
                                                                                    
               kica·k    pay-hewš       ø-am-at                                     
                                                                                    
               whiskey   BACK-be.much   3STATS-drink-PRET                           
                                                                                    
               ‘He drank too much whiskey.’ (1932:100:2)                            
                                                                                    
               [paiheˊts uˊc]                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          213) payhécuš                                                             
                                                                                    
               pay-ø-hec-uš                                                         
                                                                                    
               BACK-3STATS-be.big-be.true                                           
                                                                                    
               ‘It is truly too large.’ (1932:100:2)                                
                                                                                    
          Motion upwards. This extremely rare prefix has the form hiyik-. Prefixed to a verb, it indicates
                                                                                    
          that the action is occurring in an upwards direction.                     
                                                                                    
               [hiyitaˊto]                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         103                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          214) hiyittáˑto                                                           
                                                                                    
               hiyik-taˑt-o                                                         
                                                                                    
               UPWARDS-stand(sg)-1SS                                                
                                                                                    
               ‘I am standing up.’ (1932:123:1)                                     
                                                                                    
               [wi iyiˊktat cukiuˊlkinto]                                           
                                                                                    
          215) wí hiyiktá·tšokyúlkinto                                              
                                                                                    
               wi   hiyik-tá·t-šok-yúl-ki-nt-oˑ                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               I    UPWARDS-stand(sg)-sth-write-1SS-CONTIN-PHR.TERM                 
                                                                                    
               ‘I am going to stand up and write something.’ (1932:160:1)           
                                                                                    
               {púmpumsh iyipú’hkit}                                                
                                                                                    
          216) púmpumš hiyippúhkit                                                  
                                                                                    
               pumpumš   hiyik-ø-púh-kit                                            
                                                                                    
               flea      UPWARDS-3STATS-jump(sg)-PROG(SG)                           
                                                                                    
               ‘The flea is jumping up.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:32)                       
                                                                                    
               [ichiyikpuˊmtsĕl]                                                    
                                                                                    
          217) hiyikpúmcel                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               hiyik-pum-cel                                                        
                                                                                    
               UPWARDS-jump(pl)-1PLS                                                
                                                                                    
               ‘We are jumping up.’ (1932:107:1)                                    
                                                                                    
               [mōn hiyitsōt]                                                       
                                                                                    
          218) mó·ni hiyiccó·t                                                      
                                                                                    
               mo·ni     hiyik-ø-co·t                                               
                                                                                    
               all(animate) UPWARDS-3STATS-stand(pl)                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         104                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘Everyone is standing up.’ (1932:55:1)                               
                                                                                    
          Action performed with an instrument. This also extremely rare prefix is of the form ik-; it is
                                                                                    
          homophonous with the ergative case suffix -ik. While the vast majority of examples of an
                                                                                    
          instrumental usage, including most cases in texts, are expressed with the ergative case, the
                                                                                    
          following examples express instrument with this prefix. The first example is found in the field
                                                                                    
          notes with the same notion expressed with the ergative case.              
                                                                                    
               [niˊc-moˊñ ēñ wi ikcoˊlo]                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          219a) nešmoŋèŋ wí ikšólo                                                  
                                                                                    
               nešmoŋeŋ  wi   ik-šol-o                                              
                                                                                    
               tar       I    INSTR-rub-1SS                                         
                                                                                    
               ‘I rub it with tar.’ (1932:115:2)                                    
                                                                                    
               [niˊc-moˊñ eˊñik wi coˊlo]                                           
                                                                                    
          219b) nešmoŋéŋik wí šólo                                                  
                                                                                    
               nešmoŋeŋ-ik    wi   šol-o                                            
                                                                                    
               tar-ERG.INSTR  I    rub-1SS                                          
                                                                                    
               ‘I rub it with tar.’ (1932:115:2)                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               {î́shāk ikokónulet nésh-móng ēng ekshólulet shoknókná-u ikshólulat}  
                                                                                    
          220) išá·k ikokkóŋulat, nešmoŋèŋ iksólulat, šaknoknáw ikšólulat           
                                                                                    
               iša·k ik-ok-koŋ-ul-at,   nešmoŋeŋ  ik-sol-ul-at                      
                                                                                    
               person INSTR-COME-sieze-3PLS-PRET tar INSTR-rub-3PLS-PRET            
                                                                                    
               šak-noknaw     ik-šol-ul-at                                          
                                                                                    
               PL-wing.feather INSTR-rub-3PLS-PRET                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘They came and seized a man with something, they rubbed him with tar, they rubbed him
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         105                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               with feathers.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:61)13                               
                                                                                    
               {wi núket hatláshnto}                                                
                                                                                    
          221) wi núk ikhatlášn̥to                                                  
                                                                                    
               wi   nuk  ik-hat-laš-n̥t-o·                                          
                                                                                    
               I    self INSTR-shave-CONTIN-PHR.TERM                                
                                                                                    
               ‘I am going to shave myself with something’ (Gatschet, 1885c:63)     
                                                                                    
          Adjectives. All adjectives are stative verbs. Because adjectives are verbs, they are accented,
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          and they always follow the noun, as the normal Atakapa sentence word order is Subject (Object)
                                                                                    
          Verb.                                                                     
                                                                                    
               [Icāk cuk’hēˊc kaˊ-ukin vīˊwulat cok hatse-eˊc hiweˊ-u kaˊ-at]       
                                                                                    
          222) iša·k šoké·š káwkin wiwulat šok hacehéš hiwéw káat14                 
                                                                                    
               iša·k šoke·š ø-kaw-kin   wiw-u-lat      šok  haceheš hiwew           
                                                                                    
               person sick 3STATS-die-WHEN believe-3PLS-PRET thing bad very         
                                                                                    
               ø-ka-at                                                              
                                                                                    
               3STATS-do-PRET                                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘After someone sick died, they believed that something very bad had done it.’
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               (1932:18:118-119)                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Imōˊc mak māˊñ kaˊ ya hoˊxp naˊ-ulat coˊ itaˊxne]                   
                                                                                    
          223) himo·šmak máŋ káya hóp náwulat šó hitáhne                            
                                                                                    
               himo·š-mak maŋ ka=ya     hop  naw-ul-at      šo                      
                                                                                    
               grave-mound long make=and hole leave-3PLS-PRET soul                  
                                                                                    
               hitah-ne                                                             
                                                                                    
               come-out-ger                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         106                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘They made a long grave-mound, and left a hole for the soul to come out.’ (1932:19:139-
                                                                                    
               40)                                                                  
                                                                                    
          The adjective mo·n ‘all’ has two peculiarities. First, the form mo·n is never accented, unlike all
                                                                                    
          other adjectives. Second, it has the accented form mó·ni which is used only to refer to animate
                                                                                    
          nouns.                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Yiˊl mōn taˊ-i ō hoˊktiwē icwāˊñĕhĕ]                                
                                                                                    
          224) yíl mo·n táy ó hoktiwé· išwáŋehe                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               yil  mo·n tay  o     hok-tiwe·     iš-waŋ-ehe                        
                                                                                    
               day  all  river beside RECIP-be.together 1PLSTATS-go.about-DUB       
                                                                                    
               ‘All day we might go about together beside the river.’ (1932:13:45)  
                                                                                    
               [haˊ moˊninaˊk micat]                                                
                                                                                    
          225) ha mó·ni nakmìšat                                                    
                                                                                    
               ha   mo·ni     nak-ø-miš-at                                          
                                                                                    
               he   all(animate) 2PLO-3STATS-give-PRET                              
                                                                                    
               ‘He gave it to all of you all.’ (1932:81:2)                          
                                                                                    
          Adverbs. There are two kinds of adverbs, non-adjectival adverbs and adjectival adverbs. Non-
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          adjectival adverbs primarily of words relating to time, and a few other miscellaneous notions.
                                                                                    
          These adverbs can occur any place in the sentence. The following are the principal examples:
                                                                                    
               atkáki    ‘since; ago’                                               
                                                                                    
               ayíl      ‘today’                                                    
                                                                                    
               cátn̥     ‘afterwards’                                               
                                                                                    
               eykún     ‘now’                                                      
                                                                                    
               háhuwi·t  ‘previously’                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         107                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               hokwitólip ‘at the same time’                                        
                                                                                    
               ilú tanúkkin ‘last year’                                             
                                                                                    
               ináha     ‘sort of’                                                  
                                                                                    
               ipúc      ‘only’                                                     
                                                                                    
               ití       ‘at night’                                                 
                                                                                    
               kúliš     ‘again’                                                    
                                                                                    
               kultán    ‘long ago’                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               nákta     ‘right now’                                                
                                                                                    
               ó·l       ‘near’                                                     
                                                                                    
               tém       ‘yesterday’                                                
                                                                                    
               tíw       ‘intensely, of natural phenomena’                          
                                                                                    
               tíwhc     ‘gently, of natural phenomena’                             
                                                                                    
               totayháhš ‘in vain’                                                  
                                                                                    
               town̥táwm̥ ‘sometimes’                                               
                                                                                    
               yíln̥     ‘tomorrow’                                                 
                                                                                    
               [Iluˊ woc-peˊ haˊl imatoˊl (a)tkaki kaˊwat iluˊ wocpeˊ latsīˊk hinaˊka wăˊciñ]
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          226) ilú wošpé hálhimatól atkáki káwat ilú wošpé laccí·k hinákka wášiŋ    
                                                                                    
               ilu  wošpe     hal-himatol atkaki  ø-kaw-at       ilu                
                                                                                    
               year ten       again-four ago      3STATS-die-PRET year              
                                                                                    
               wošpe     lacci·k   hinakka   ø-wašiŋ                                
                                                                                    
               ten       six       like      3STATS-be.so.old                       
                                                                                    
               ‘She died fourteen years ago, when she was about sixty years old.’ (1932:15:87-88)
                                                                                    
               [Samtiˊ hitiˊ kuˊcmelmēl puˊm kaˊ-ulat]                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         108                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          227) samtí ití kúšmélme·l púm káulat                                      
                                                                                    
               samti     ití  kuš,mel,me·l   pum  ka-ul-at                          
                                                                                    
               Saturday  night black.person,PL, dance make-3PLS-PRET                
                                                                                    
               ‘On Saturday night, the black people held a dance.’ (1932:20:141)    
                                                                                    
               [Kiwilc hikuˊlat toˊ’ntaˊvm]                                         
                                                                                    
          228) kiwílš hìkulat town̥ táwm̥                                           
                                                                                    
               kiwilš         hik-ul-at           town̥tawm̥                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               white.people   catch.sight.of-3PLS-PRET sometimes                    
                                                                                    
               ‘White people have caught sight of him sometimes.’ (1932:11:34)      
                                                                                    
               [ti-u kaukauˊkit]                                                    
                                                                                    
          229) tíw kawkáwkit                                                        
                                                                                    
               tiw       ø-kawkaw-kit                                               
                                                                                    
               intensely 3STATS-rain-PROG(SG)                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘It is raining hard.’ (1932:58:1)                                    
                                                                                    
               [tiˊ-uxts kaukauˊkit]                                                
                                                                                    
          230) tíwhc kawkáwkit                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               tiwhc     ø-kawkaw-kit                                               
                                                                                    
               gently    3STATS-rain-PROG(SG)                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘It is raining gently.’ (1932:58:1)                                  
                                                                                    
          Several of these adverbs are derived or polymorphemic, such as ití ‘at night,’ from the noun ití
                                                                                    
          ‘night,’ or ayíl ‘today’ from á yíl ‘this day,’ or yíln̥ ‘tomorrow,’ c.f. yíl ‘be day,’ or totayháhš ‘in
                                                                                    
          vain’ -háhš ‘negative.’ A non-adjectival adverb can also be used as a noun by placing it in
                                                                                    
          subject relation to an intransitive verb.                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         109                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               {kúltan ok-tíshat okwángsh hā́ngshat}                                
                                                                                    
          231) kultàn oktíšat, hokwáŋš háŋšat                                       
                                                                                    
               kultan    ok-ø-tiš-at         hokwaŋš   ø-haŋš-at                    
                                                                                    
               long.time COME-3STATS-go-PRET war       3STATS-be.ended-PRET         
                                                                                    
               ‘A long time has passed, the (Civil) War is over.’ (Gatschet 1885b:168)
                                                                                    
            Adjectival adverbs are formed from an adjective root by means of the suffix -ka, which is
                                                                                    
          probably derived from the verb ká ‘to make; to do.’ These adverbs must precede the verbs they
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          modify directly.                                                          
                                                                                    
               [toˊlka heyiˊkiulat]                                                 
                                                                                    
          232) tólka hiyíkiulat                                                     
                                                                                    
               tol-ka    hi-yiki-ul-at                                              
                                                                                    
               good-ADV  1SOBJ-pay-3PLS-PRET                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘They paid me well.’ (1932:155:20)                                   
                                                                                    
               [hiweˊ-uka kaukauˊkit]                                               
                                                                                    
          233) hiwéwka kawkáwkit                                                    
                                                                                    
               hiwew-ka  ø-kawkaw-kit                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               strong-ADV 3STATS-rain-PROG(SG)                                      
                                                                                    
               ‘It is raining heavily.’ (1932:57:1)                                 
                                                                                    
               [kuˊtska yiltāt]                                                     
                                                                                    
          234) kúcka yíltá·t                                                        
                                                                                    
               kuc-ka    yil-ta·t-ø                                                 
                                                                                    
               be.red-ADV 3STATS-shine-stand(sg)-3S                                 
                                                                                    
               ‘It is standing and shining redly.’ (1932:156:1)                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         110                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [taˊ-i katiˊct]                                                      
                                                                                    
          235) táyka tíš                                                            
                                                                                    
               tay-ka    tiš-ø                                                      
                                                                                    
               straight-ADV go-3S                                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘It goes straight.’ (1932:125:1)                                     
                                                                                    
               [Tchaˊkta yuk’hiti icāˊt atyiˊnsne hinaˊka cakeˊat]                  
                                                                                    
          236) čákta yukhíti iša·thatyíncne hinákka šakkéat                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               čakta     yukhiti   iša·t-hat-yinc-ne        hinak-ka                
                                                                                    
               Choctaw   Indian    head-REFLEX-wrap.around-GER be.like-ADV          
                                                                                    
               šak-ke-at                                                            
                                                                                    
               3PLSTATS-have-PRET                                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘The Choctaw Indians had crowns in the same way.’ (1932:19:136-37)   
                                                                                    
          Comparison of Adjectives. Comparison of adjectives using a standard marker and standard of
                                                                                    
          comparison is only found in elicited sentences.15 In Southeastern languages, comparison of
                                                                                    
          adjectives using a standard of comparison seems not to have been done aboriginally, and only
                                                                                    
          arose as calques from European languages (see Kimball, 1989, for how comparison is handled in
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          natural texts in Koasati). With that caveat, comparative constructions are formed in Atakapa
                                                                                    
          using the verb iyé ‘to be more’ compounded with the adjectival verb in the comparison, with the
                                                                                    
          standard of comparison is in the directional case. When compounded with iyé, the adjectival verb
                                                                                    
          loses its accent.                                                         
                                                                                    
               [tuˊl taˊyut iyeˊ kaˊc]                                              
                                                                                    
          237) túl táyot iyékaš                                                     
                                                                                    
               tul  tay-ot    ø-iye-kaš-ø                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         111                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               lake river-DIR 3STATS-be.more-be.deep                                
                                                                                    
               ‘The lake is deeper than the river.’ (1932:125:1)                    
                                                                                    
               [yaˊ tsiˊk oˊt cakiyeˊ lāk]                                          
                                                                                    
          238) yá cí·kot šakiyéla·k                                                 
                                                                                    
               ya        ci·k-ot   šak-ø-iye-la·k                                   
                                                                                    
               that.person two-DIR 3PLO-3STATS-more-be.strong                       
                                                                                    
               ‘That person is the stronger of the two.’ (1932:154:1)               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          This construction is derived from a natural one in which the noun in the directional case, the
                                                                                    
          standard of comparison, does not occur.                                   
                                                                                    
               [yukiˊti nuˊnkin kēˊt’ntat Yuk’hiˊti Tuˊl toˊlpot inoˊ Tuˊl Teˊ-u iyeˊ edson]
                                                                                    
          239) yukhíti núŋkin ké·tntat yukhíti túl tólpot inó túl téw iyéhicon      
                                                                                    
               yukhiti nuŋ-kin ø-ke·t-nt-at       yukhiti   tul  tolpot ino         
                                                                                    
               Indian village-LOC 3STATS-dwell-CONTIN-PRET Indian lake east side    
                                                                                    
               tul  tew       ø-iye-hicon                                           
                                                                                    
               lake upstream  3STATS-be.more-be.small                               
                                                                                    
               ‘She used to live in an Indian village on the east side of Lake Prien (Indian Lake);
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Lake Charles (Upstream Lake) is smaller.’ (1932:71-72)               
                                                                                    
          Statements of equality use the adverb ahinákka to indicate the comparison.
                                                                                    
               {kiwílsh yukíti shakónshûl wī́sh akíta hináka hé-u hiatú-iv}         
                                                                                    
          240) kiwílš yukhíti šakóŋšul wí·š hakít akhinákka héwhihatwíw             
                                                                                    
               kiwilš    yukhiti   šak-oŋš-ul     wi-iš hakit akhinakka             
                                                                                    
               white.person Indian 3PLO-not.like-3PLS I-FOC they how                
                                                                                    
               hew-hi-hat-wiw                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         112                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               be.much-1SSTATS-REFLEX-believe                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘The white people do not like the Indians, but I think as much of myself as they do.’
                                                                                    
               (Gatschet, 1885b:80)                                                 
                                                                                    
          The equivalent of a superlative is formed using the verb iyáhi ‘to be ahead of’ in a set of two
                                                                                    
          clauses.                                                                  
                                                                                    
               [yaˊ kic cokciˊ-u taneˊ-ucaˊk iyaˊ-i]                                
                                                                                    
          241) yá kíš šokšíw tannéw šakiyáhi                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ya   kiš       šokšiw    tan-hew   šak-ø-iyahi                       
                                                                                    
               that woman     be.stingy other-PL  3PLO-3STATS-be.ahead.of           
                                                                                    
               ‘That woman is the stingiest one of all the others,’ lit. ‘That woman is stingy; she is
                                                                                    
               ahead of the other people.’ (1932:112:2)                             
                                                                                    
          A similar construction is found in a natural text.                        
                                                                                    
               [cokoˊ-i taˊnuk mōn cokiyaˊ-i <ōˊtsi> taneˊ-uts]                     
                                                                                    
          242) šokóy tanùk mo·n šakiyáhi tannéw [óci]                               
                                                                                    
               šokoy tanuk mo·n šak-ø-iyahi       tan-hew   oci                     
                                                                                    
               chief one all  3PLO-3STATS-be.ahead of other-PL above                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘One chief was ahead in regard to all things above the others.’ (1932:9:10-11)
                                                                                    
          A second comparative construction compounds the adjective with the verb íti, ‘to be in front.’ It
                                                                                    
          is given as an exact equivalent of iyé plus an adjective. It cannot express a standard of
                                                                                    
          comparison; if that is required, the construction with iyé and the directional case is needed, as in
                                                                                    
          example 245.                                                              
                                                                                    
               [yaˊ hidsoˊn iti]                                                    
                                                                                    
          243) yá hicóníti                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         113                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ya        ø-hicon-íti                                                
                                                                                    
               that.one  3STATS-be.small-be.in.front                                
                                                                                    
               ‘That person is smaller.’ (1932:42:2)                                
                                                                                    
               {ā́sh lā́k tsík íti}                                                 
                                                                                    
          244) á·š lá·k cí·k íti                                                    
                                                                                    
               a-iš      ø-la·k         ci·k ø-íti                                  
                                                                                    
               this.one-foc 3STATS-be.strong two 3STATS-be.in.front                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘This person is the stronger of the two.’ (Gatschet 1885b:81)        
                                                                                    
               [tsanuˊkc meˊts iˊti cuˊlut iyeˊmets]                                
                                                                                    
          245) canúkš mécíti šúlot iyémec                                           
                                                                                    
               canuk-š   ø=mec-íti           šul-ot    ø-iye-mec                    
                                                                                    
               horse-FOC 3STATS-be.tall-be.in.front dog-DIR 3STATS-be.more-be.tall  
                                                                                    
               ‘The horse is taller; it is taller than the dog.’ (1932:55:1)        
                                                                                    
          This construction is derived from a natural one.                          
                                                                                    
               [hiōl waˊcin iˊti haˊ ēˊñ Toussaint]                                 
                                                                                    
          246) hiyó·l wášiŋíti ha é·ŋ <Toussaint>                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               hiyo·l    ø-wašiŋ-íti              ha   e·ŋ  <Toussaint>             
                                                                                    
               son       3STATS-be.so.old-be.in.front his name PN                   
                                                                                    
               ‘Her older son’s name is Toussaint.’ (1932:15:81-82)                 
                                                                                    
          There is a single example that is translated as comparsion of adverbs, but the elements are
                                                                                    
          adjectival.                                                               
                                                                                    
               [tsanuˊk cuˊl oˊt iyeˊ lāˊk patnaˊ-u]                                
                                                                                    
          247) canúk šúlot iyéla·kpatnáw                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         114                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               canuk šul-ot   ø-iye-la·k-patnaw                                     
                                                                                    
               horse dog-DIR  3STATS-be.more-be.strong-run                          
                                                                                    
               ‘The horse runs faster than the dog.’ (1932:55:1)                    
                                                                                    
          Verbal Derivational Processes. Verbs can be derived by root verbalization, derivational
                                                                                    
          suffixes, and several means of root pluralization.                        
                                                                                    
          Root verbalization. There is no formal distinction in Atakapa between nominal, postpositional,
                                                                                    
          and verbal roots. The language lacks a copula, nor are there any traces of the former existence of
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          one. A root noun may be converted into a verb by changing the pitch of the accented syllable of
                                                                                    
          the noun in the aorist mode, or adding verbal suffixes in any mode, in which case standard
                                                                                    
          accentuation rules apply.                                                 
                                                                                    
               [kiˊc]              [Taˊkapo kic]                                    
                                                                                    
          248) kíš                 tákapa kìš                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘woman’             takapa    ø-kìš                                  
                                                                                    
                                   Atakapa   3STATS-be.woman                        
                                                                                    
                                   ‘She was an Atakapa woman.’ (1932:14:70-71)      
                                                                                    
               [aˊlc]              [aˊlckit]                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          249) álš                 álškit                                           
                                                                                    
               ‘ice’               ø-alš-kit                                        
                                                                                    
                                   3STATS-ice-PROG(SG)                              
                                                                                    
                                   ‘it is freezing weather’ (1932:25:1)             
                                                                                    
               [haˊ-u]             [haˊ-ukit]                                       
                                                                                    
          250) háw                 háwkit                                           
                                                                                    
               ‘snow’              ø-haw-kit                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         115                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                   3STATS-snow- PROG(SG)                            
                                                                                    
                                   ‘it is snowing’ (1932:37:1)                      
                                                                                    
               [icāˊk]             [wi aˊp i-icaˊkět]                               
                                                                                    
          251) išá·k               wí áp hiišá·kat                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘person’            wi   ap   hi-iša·k-at                            
                                                                                    
                                   I    here 1SSTATS-person-PRET                    
                                                                                    
                                   ‘I was born here.’ (1932:144:2)                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [cokoˊ-i]           [haˊkit cokoˊ-i-yulĕhĕ]                          
                                                                                    
          252) šokóy               hakít šokóyulehe                                 
                                                                                    
               ‘chief’             hakit šokoy-ul-ehe                               
                                                                                    
                                   they be.chief-3PLS-DUB                           
                                                                                    
                                   ‘They may become chiefs.’ (1932:69:1)            
                                                                                    
               {te’hlk}            {nésh té’hltāt}                                  
                                                                                    
          253) téłk                néš  téłttá·t-3S                                 
                                                                                    
               ‘flower’            neš  teƛk-ta·t-ø                                 
                                                                                    
                                   tree flower-stand(sg) (Gatschet 1885b:67)        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                   ‘A tree is standing and flowering.’              
                                                                                    
          Postpositions can also be changed into verbs by adding verbal suffixes.   
                                                                                    
               [oˊ]                [aˊñ taˊ-i oˊat]                                 
                                                                                    
          254a) ó                  áŋ táy óat                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘at the edge of; near’ aŋ tay ø-o-at                                 
                                                                                    
                                   house river 3STATS-be.near-PRET                  
                                                                                    
                                   ‘The house was near the river.’ (1932:124:2)     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         116                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                   [aˊñ taˊ-i oˊtikit]                              
                                                                                    
          254b)                    áŋ táy ótikit                                    
                                                                                    
                                   aŋ   tay  ø-o-tikit                              
                                                                                    
                                   house river 3STATS-be.near-FUT                   
                                                                                    
                                   ‘The house will be near the river.’ (1932:124:2) 
                                                                                    
               [huˊ-i]             [hōˊpcne laˊns tiˊl huˊyat]                      
                                                                                    
          255) húy                 hópšne lans tíl húyat                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘under’             hopšne    lanš til  ø-huy-at                     
                                                                                    
                                   awl       deer hide 3STATS-be.under-PRET         
                                                                                    
                                   ‘The awl was under the deer hide.’ (1932:46:1)   
                                                                                    
          Verbs derived from nouns have modal forms identical to those of root verbs, as shown by the
                                                                                    
          following four examples derived from the noun ipšók ‘doctor.’             
                                                                                    
               [ipcoˊx̥ kuˊl]                                                       
                                                                                    
          256) ipšókul                                                              
                                                                                    
               ipšok-ul                                                             
                                                                                    
               doctor-3PLS                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘They are doctors.’ (1932:49:2)                                      
                                                                                    
               [wic hi-ipcoˊkat]                                                    
                                                                                    
          257) wí·š hiipšókat                                                       
                                                                                    
               wi-iš hi-ipšók-at                                                    
                                                                                    
               I-foc 1SSTATS-doctor-PRET                                            
                                                                                    
               ‘I was a doctor.’ (1932:49:2)                                        
                                                                                    
               [ipcoˊkěnhăn]                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         117                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          258) ipšókehe                                                             
                                                                                    
               ø-ipšok-ehe                                                          
                                                                                    
               3STATS-doctor-DUB                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘He might be a doctor.’ (1932:49:2)                                  
                                                                                    
               [ipcotikit]                                                          
                                                                                    
          259) ipšóttikit                                                           
                                                                                    
               ø-ipšok-tikit                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               3STATS-doctor-FUT                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘He will be a doctor.’ (1932:49:2)                                   
                                                                                    
          This easy verbalization of words of various classes is probably the reason why Atakapa lacks a
                                                                                    
          copula, or a verb ‘to be’. Compare the Southeastern language Koasati, which possesses a copula,
                                                                                    
          with Atakapa, which lacks one:                                            
                                                                                    
          KOASATI:                                                                  
                                                                                    
          260a) mikkó              mikkók cíl                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘chief’             mikkó-k   ci-li-DEL                              
                                                                                    
                                   chief-NOM 2STATS-be-PHR.TERM                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                   ‘You are a chief.’                               
                                                                                    
          ATAKAPA:                                                                  
                                                                                    
               [cokoˊ-i]           [ĕˊncoˊkoi]                                      
                                                                                    
          260b) šokóy ‘chief’      n̥šokòy                                          
                                                                                    
                                   n̥-šokoy                                         
                                                                                    
                                   2STATS-be.chief                                  
                                                                                    
                                   ‘You are a chief.’ (1932:69:1)                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         118                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          The following are further examples of noun verbalization in what are copular sentences. In
                                                                                    
          examples 262 and 263 nouns in locative cases are verbalized.              
                                                                                    
               [yaˊ cuˊl haˊkit kiñ]                                                
                                                                                    
          261) yá šúl hakìt kìŋ                                                     
                                                                                    
               ya   šul  hakit ø-kìŋ                                                
                                                                                    
               that dog  their 3STATS-be.pet                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘That dog is their pet.’ (1932:117:1)                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [wi anˊ nē-tsaˊx̥ kip]                                               
                                                                                    
          262) wi aŋ ne·cákip                                                       
                                                                                    
               wi   áŋ   ø-ne·-cak-ip                                               
                                                                                    
               my   house 3STATS-land-dry-INESS.be                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘My house is on dry land.’ (1932:28:2)                               
                                                                                    
               [yuk’hiˊti cakimōc-neˊkin haˊ]                                       
                                                                                    
          263) yukhíti šakhimo·šné·kinháh                                           
                                                                                    
               yukhiti   ø-šakhimo·šne·-kin-hah                                     
                                                                                    
               Indian    3STATS-cemetery-LOC.be-NEG                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘She is not in the Indian cemetery.’ (1932:15:90)                    
                                                                                    
          Verbal derivational suffixes. While nouns can become verbs without morphological change,
                                                                                    
          there are a handful of suffixes that can derive verbs from other verbs and from nouns. The
                                                                                    
          productive derivational suffixes are the causative –(i)š, the transitivizer -i, and -šim, ‘to be
                                                                                    
          nothing but N.’ There is one non-productive suffix, -c, which changes the valency of a verb in
                                                                                    
          an unpredictable fashion.                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         119                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          The causative. The causative suffix, –(i)š, is added to an intransitive verb that describes a state
                                                                                    
          to indicate the action of the intransitive verb is caused by the subject. The form -iš is used when
                                                                                    
          suffixing -š would form an impermissible consonant cluster.               
                                                                                    
               [atsiˊl kuˊts]                                                       
                                                                                    
          264a) haccíl kúc                                                          
                                                                                    
               haccil ø-kuc                                                         
                                                                                    
               rust 3STATS-be.red                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘The rust is red’ (1932:74:1)                                        
                                                                                    
               [hatkuˊdsico]                                                        
                                                                                    
          264b) hatkúcišo                                                           
                                                                                    
               hat-kuc-iš-o                                                         
                                                                                    
               REFLEX-be.red-CAUS-1SS                                               
                                                                                    
               ‘I paint myself red.’ (1932:74:1)                                    
                                                                                    
               [wi tsanuˊk mēˊl]                                                    
                                                                                    
          265a) wi canúk mé·l                                                       
                                                                                    
               wi   canuk     ø-me·l                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               my   horse     3STATS-be.black                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘My horse is black.’ (1932:80:1)                                     
                                                                                    
               [wi mēˊlco]                                                          
                                                                                    
          265b) wí mé·lšo                                                           
                                                                                    
               wi   me·l-š-o                                                        
                                                                                    
               I    be.black-CAUS-1SS                                               
                                                                                    
               ‘I blacken it.’ (1932:80:1)                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         120                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          This suffix is not freely used with other intransitive verbs, although there are a few examples
                                                                                    
          such as waŋiš, ‘to drive something,’ from wáŋ ‘to go about,’ and hitáwš ‘to let something out,’
                                                                                    
          from hitáh ‘to come out.’16                                               
                                                                                    
               [cakwinēˊ cokwaˊñic yaˊcoktuˊkulet]                                  
                                                                                    
          266) šakwiné šakwaŋišya šaktúkulat                                        
                                                                                    
               šak-wine  šak-wáŋ-iš=ya            šak-tuk-ul-at                     
                                                                                    
               3PLO-find 3PLO-go.about-CAUS=and   3pl-bring-3pls-pret               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘They find them, drive them, and bring them.’ (1932:13:60)           
                                                                                    
          Rather than using this suffix, the causative of most intransitive verbs and of almost all transitive
                                                                                    
          verbs is expressed with a double verb construction with ka ‘to make,’ or nawš ‘to let.’
                                                                                    
               [kidcoˊmc npuˊnsĕn laˊ-u ka]                                         
                                                                                    
          267) kicóŋš n̥púnsen láw ká                                               
                                                                                    
               kicoŋš    n̥-puns-en     law  ka-ø                                   
                                                                                    
               fire      2SSTATS-blow.on-IF burn make-2/3S                          
                                                                                    
               ‘If you blow on a fire, it makes it burn.’ (1932:67:1)               
                                                                                    
               [wi makaˊu naˊuco]                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          268) wí makáw náwšo                                                       
                                                                                    
               wi   makáw     náwš-o                                                
                                                                                    
               I    fall(sg)  let-1SS                                               
                                                                                    
               ‘I make it fall.’ (1932:78:2)                                        
                                                                                    
          There are traces of the former use of the suffix -iš /-š with some transitive verbs, for example the
                                                                                    
          noun ‘cup; dipper’ ámšne is a nominalization of the verb *amš ‘to cause to drink something,’ and
                                                                                    
          in the compound noun šokwán šakúciš, ‘interpreter’ šakúciš comes from the verb *úciš ‘to cause
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         121                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          to know something.’ There is also a rare use of this suffix with transitive verbs to form a kind of
                                                                                    
          applicative:                                                              
                                                                                    
               haccewwán ‘to forget something’ haccewwán-iš ‘to forget something belonging to
                                                                                    
                                                  someone’                          
                                                                                    
               kóc ‘to cut something’   kóc-iš ‘to cut a piece out of something’    
                                                                                    
               ƛóp ‘to stick something in’ ƛóp-iš ‘to stick something into something’
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            Quite frequently the suffix -š seems simply to indicate that a word is a verb, and seems to add
                                                                                    
          nothing semantically to the root meaning. The vast majority of verbs that have a root ending in -
                                                                                    
          š are transitive; however, there are any number of intransitive verbs that end in -š, such as tíš ‘to
                                                                                    
          go,’ pólš, ‘to float,’ and ƛákš, ‘to be dirty.’ There are also many transitive verbs that do not have
                                                                                    
          the suffix -š, such as nám ‘to beg someone,’ ká ‘to do something,’ and yáh ‘to eat something.’
                                                                                    
            This suffix is optional on the verb ‘to want’ kóh/kóhš (although it is obligatory on oŋš ‘not to
                                                                                    
          want something’). It is also optional on the negative affix -háh, which then appears as -háhš.
                                                                                    
          There is apparently no meaning difference between the forms.              
                                                                                    
               [hinimaˊha]                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          269a) hinimáháh                                                           
                                                                                    
               hi-nima-ø-hah                                                        
                                                                                    
               1SO-kill-2SIMP-NEG                                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘Don’t kill me!’ (1932:91:2)                                         
                                                                                    
               [hinimaˊhaxc]                                                        
                                                                                    
          269b) hinimáháhš                                                          
                                                                                    
               hi-nima-ø-hah-š                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         122                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               1SO-kill-2SIMP-NEG-š                                                 
                                                                                    
               ‘Don’t kill me!’ (1932:91:2)                                         
                                                                                    
          Uniquely, the negative affix with -š is used as an independent verb meaning ‘not to have
                                                                                    
          something,’ and is the negative of ké ‘to have something.’                
                                                                                    
               [Ickiciˊl nīt keˊat. Hiōˊl hāˊxcat]                                  
                                                                                    
          270) iškišíl ní·t kéat hiyó·l háhšat                                      
                                                                                    
               iškišil   ni·t ø-ke-at        hiyo·l    ø-hahš-at                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               daughter  five 3STATS-have-PRET son     3SSTATS-not.have-PRET        
                                                                                    
               ‘He had five daughters; he had no sons.’ (1932:16:97-98)             
                                                                                    
               [caˊkiol katnaˊu cak ́āˊx̥ c]                                        
                                                                                    
          271) šakyòl katnáw šakháhš                                                
                                                                                    
               šakyol    katnaw    šak-hahš                                         
                                                                                    
               man       beard     3PLSTATS-not.have                                
                                                                                    
               ‘Men do not have beards.’ (1932:10:24)                               
                                                                                    
          The transitivizer. The suffix -i derives transitive verbs from intransitives. There are a number
                                                                                    
          of such transitives in -i which lack a corresponding intransitive.        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Intransitive        Transitive                                            
                                                                                    
          cák  ‘to be dry’    cáki      ‘to dry something’                          
                                                                                    
          láw  ‘to burn’      láwi      ‘to burn something’17                       
                                                                                    
          líl  ‘to be soft’   líli      ‘to soften something                        
                                                                                    
          páƛ  ‘to break’     páƛi      ‘to break something’18                      
                                                                                    
          péh  ‘to finish’    péhi      ‘to finish something’                       
                                                                                    
          tóh  ‘to sit (pl)’  tóhi      ‘to get in a vehicle’                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         123                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               -              íŋi       ‘to look for something’                     
                                                                                    
               -              iyáhi     ‘to be ahead of someone’                    
                                                                                    
               -              kíni      ‘to sharpen something’                      
                                                                                    
               -              lóhi      ‘to help someone                            
                                                                                    
               -              n̥téhi    ‘to frighten something’                     
                                                                                    
               -              óŋi       ‘to thread something’                       
                                                                                    
               -              péni      ‘to cure someone’                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               -              wáhi      ‘to order someone’                          
                                                                                    
               -              yíki      ‘to pay someone’                            
                                                                                    
          There is an example of this transitivizing suffix being added to a transitive verb, making it
                                                                                    
          ditransitive: ámi ‘to give someone something to drink.’ The following example is found in
                                                                                    
          Gatschet’s field notes; it was not seen by Swanton.                       
                                                                                    
               {na há ‘n ámeat}                                                     
                                                                                    
          272) ná há n̥ ámiat                                                       
                                                                                    
               ná        há   n̥-ámi-at                                             
                                                                                    
               you(sg)   s/he 2SSTATS-give.drink-PRET                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘You gave him something to drink.’ (Gatschet, 1885c[8])              
                                                                                    
          The suffix -šim ‘to be nothing but N’. Suffixed to a noun, this suffix indicates that there is
                                                                                    
          nothing but the noun involved in the action. Suffixed to a body-part noun, however, it indicates
                                                                                    
          that the body part is bare or exposed. This semantically unusual suffix is not unusual in the
                                                                                    
          context of Southeastern languages. Verbalizing suffixes with identical semantics have been
                                                                                    
          recorded in Koasati (Kimball 1991:169-172) and Natchez (Kimball 2005:428-429). The š of the
                                                                                    
          suffix surfaces as s when the suffix is attached to a noun ending in a stop or š.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         124                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [ha icāˊt ha uˊc mōn naˊ-ucĕm]                                       
                                                                                    
          273) ha išá·t ha úš mo·n náwšim                                           
                                                                                    
               ha   iša·t ha  uš   mo·n ø-naw-šim                                   
                                                                                    
               his  head his  body all  3STATS-hair-NOTHING.BUT                     
                                                                                    
               ‘His head and his whole body were nothing but hair.’ (1932:11:33-34) 
                                                                                    
               [Yukiˊt noˊmcsĕm tuhtsĕl yukiˊt nuk]                                 
                                                                                    
          274) yukít nómšsim túhcel yukít nuk                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               yukit ø-nomš-šim         tuh-cel        yukit nuk                    
                                                                                    
               we   3STATS-child-NOTHING.BUT stay(pl)-1PLS we alone                 
                                                                                    
               ‘It was nothing but us children; we stayed there all by ourselves.’ (1932:17:107-08)
                                                                                    
               [cokiōˊl noˊmc hakīˊt cukiōlc-hatkeˊ mōn luˊcĕm taˊlcĕm]             
                                                                                    
          275) šakyólnómš hakít šakyólšokhatké mó·n lúšim tálšim                    
                                                                                    
               šakyol-nomš hakit šakyol-šokhatke mo·n ø-lu-šim                      
                                                                                    
               male-child their male-clothing all 3STATS-dirt-NOTHING.BUT           
                                                                                    
               ø-tal-šim                                                            
                                                                                    
               3STATS-hole-NOTHING.BUT                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘The boys’ trousers are nothing but dirt and nothing but holes.’ (1932:14:65)
                                                                                    
               [icāk icaˊt-sĭm]                                                     
                                                                                    
          276) iša·k išá·tsim                                                       
                                                                                    
               iša·k     ø-iša·t-šim                                                
                                                                                    
               person    3STATS-head-NOTHING.BUT                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘The man is bareheaded.’ (1932:109:1)                                
                                                                                    
               [icāk hikāˊtsĭm]                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         125                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          277) iša·k hiká·tsim                                                      
                                                                                    
               iša·k     ø-hika·t-šim                                               
                                                                                    
               person    3STATS-foot-NOTHING.BUT                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘The man is barefoot.’ (1932:108:2)                                  
                                                                                    
          With numbers, the suffix -šim has an additional meaning: ‘N apiece,’ tanúkšim ‘one apiece,’
                                                                                    
          cí·kšim ‘two apiece,’ and so forth.                                       
                                                                                    
          The valence-changing suffix –c. There is a non-productive suffix –c that changes the valency
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          of a verb. The following are the only examples noted:19                   
                                                                                    
          ikháwš    ‘to drown something’ ikháw-c  ‘to drown (intransitive)’         
                                                                                    
          wán       ‘to say something’  wán-c     ‘to say something to someone’     
                                                                                    
          taŋkóhi   ‘to jump into something’ kóhi-c ‘to sink; set (of the sun)      
                                                                                    
          Detransitivizing prefixes. There are two ways of making a transitive verb intransitive, the first
                                                                                    
          using the reciprocal prefix hat-, the other is incorporating the noun cók ‘thing’ as a dummy
                                                                                    
          object. Each of these formations can be seen as a kind of antipassive (c.f. Dixon, 1994:146-152).
                                                                                    
          In the case of intransitive verbs derived with the prefix hat-, the subject of the verbal action is
                                                                                    
          treated as if it were doing the action to itself.                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               {nésh hatsā́tskit}                                                   
                                                                                    
          278) néš haccá·ckit                                                       
                                                                                    
               neš  hat-ca·c-kit                                                    
                                                                                    
               wood REFLEX-crack-PROG(SG)                                           
                                                                                    
               ‘The wood is cracking.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:131)                        
                                                                                    
               [kaukauˊ hatpaˊ-u]                                                   
                                                                                    
          279) kawkáw hatpáw                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         126                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               kawkaw    hat-paw                                                    
                                                                                    
               water     REFLEX-swing                                               
                                                                                    
               ‘The water eddies.’ (1932:103:2)                                     
                                                                                    
            The incorporation of the noun cók as a dummy object derives an intransitive verb from one
                                                                                    
          that requires a direct object. Usually, the incorporated noun is seperable, as in example 276b;
                                                                                    
          however, in a few derived intransitives it is fused to the root; most notably šokyáh ‘to eat,’
                                                                                    
          derived from yáh ‘to eat something.’ In this case, the incorporated noun loses its accent.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [cakioˊl ckaliˊt haihaiˊc nāˊkco]                                    
                                                                                    
          280a) šakyólškalít hayháyš nákšo                                          
                                                                                    
               šakyol-iškalit hayhayš nakš-o                                        
                                                                                    
               man-child weep      hear-1ss                                         
                                                                                    
               ‘I hear a boy weeping.’                                              
                                                                                    
               [coˊknaˊkc haˊxc]                                                    
                                                                                    
          280b) šóknákšháhš                                                         
                                                                                    
               šok=nakš-hahš                                                        
                                                                                    
               thing=hear-NEG                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘He does not hear.’ (1932:85:1)                                      
                                                                                    
               [coˊkuxts (h)aˊxc]                                                   
                                                                                    
          281a) šókúhcháhš                                                          
                                                                                    
               šok=uhc-hahš                                                         
                                                                                    
               thing=know-NEG                                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘He is ignorant.’ (1932:138:2)                                       
                                                                                    
               [coˊk-heˊ-ux̥ ts]                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         127                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          281b) šókhiùhc                                                            
                                                                                    
               šok-hi-uhc                                                           
                                                                                    
               thing-1SSTATS-know                                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘I know’ (1932:138:2)                                                
                                                                                    
               [il yaˊko]                                                           
                                                                                    
          282a) íl yáho                                                             
                                                                                    
               il   yah-o                                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               raw  eat-1SS                                                         
                                                                                    
               ‘I eat things raw.’ (1932:152:1)                                     
                                                                                    
               [icok-yaˊx̥ ko]                                                      
                                                                                    
          282b) hišokyáhkoh                                                         
                                                                                    
               hi-šokyáh-koh                                                        
                                                                                    
               1SSTATS-eat-DESID                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I want to eat.’ (1932:152:1)                                        
                                                                                    
            In the following textual example of this kind of antipassive, the narrator is not interested in
                                                                                    
          what things her cousin is sewing, rather she is focusing on the fact that her cousin is a hard
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          worker.                                                                   
                                                                                    
               [cokaˊ-hiweˊ-u cithaˊñ liˊl[i] yaˊ cokcukyiˊkc yaˊ cukwaˊk ‘n āˊl pai-oˊk yaˊ
                                                                                    
          283) šokká hiwéw šityáŋ líliya šokšakyíkšya šokwákn̥ a·l payókya          
                                                                                    
               pīˊlkin ti(xt) coxkciˊukit]                                          
                                                                                    
               pílkin tíhtšokšílkit                                                 
                                                                                    
               šok=ka-ø  hiwew     šit-yaŋ        lili-ø=ya šokšakyikš-ø=ya         
                                                                                    
               thing=do-3S strongly Spanish.moss-green soften-3S=and sell-3S=and    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         128                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               šokwak=n̥ a·l       pay-ok-ø=ya    pil-kin                           
                                                                                    
               bread=and meat      BACK-come-3S=and bed-LOC                         
                                                                                    
               ø-tiht-šok=šil-kit                                                   
                                                                                    
               3STATS-lie(sg)-thing=sew-PROG                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘She works hard; she softens green Spanish moss and she sells it, and brings back bread
                                                                                    
               and meat, and she keeps on lying on the bed sewing.’                 
                                                                                    
          Verbal derivation by prefixation. Occasionally new verbs are derived by prefixation, the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          semantics of which are not related to the semantics of the individual prefixes, as in the following:
                                                                                    
               yikš      ‘to pay something’                                         
                                                                                    
               šakyíkš   ‘to buy something’ šak- ‘third person plural object’       
                                                                                    
               šokšakyíkš ‘to sell something’ šok- ‘indefinite object’20            
                                                                                    
          Verb pluralization. There are three kinds of verb pluralization in Atakapa: Reduplication,
                                                                                    
          Plurals in -m, and Suppletion.                                            
                                                                                    
          Reduplication. Reduplication is an active verbal process in Atakapa grammar. There are two
                                                                                    
          kinds of reduplication: simple reduplication and reduplication with infixation.
                                                                                    
          Simple reduplication. This form of reduplication replicates the initial CVC of the verb root.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Vowel-initial roots are treated as if they have an initial glottal stop. If the verb root has a long
                                                                                    
          vowel, the reduplicated syllable has a short vowel. The semantics of the verb root determine the
                                                                                    
          meaning of reduplication. In stative verbs, reduplication indicates plurality of subject. In active
                                                                                    
          verbs reduplication indicates either repetition of an action or plurality of object. In reduplication
                                                                                    
          of stative verbs, the accent shifts to the reduplicated element; in the reduplication of active verbs,
                                                                                    
          the accent remains on the verb root.                                      
                                                                                    
               [nēˊc līˊl]                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         129                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          284a) néš líl                                                             
                                                                                    
               neš  ø-lil                                                           
                                                                                    
               wood 3STATS-be.soft                                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘The piece of wood is soft.’ (1932:76:2)                             
                                                                                    
               [nēˊc lilil]                                                         
                                                                                    
          284b) néš líllil                                                          
                                                                                    
               neš  ø-lil,lil                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               wood 3STATS-REDUP,be.soft                                            
                                                                                    
               ‘The pieces of wood are soft.’ (1932:76:2)                           
                                                                                    
               [taˊntstal tleˊm]                                                    
                                                                                    
          285a) tanstàl ƛém                                                         
                                                                                    
               tanstal   ø-ƛem                                                      
                                                                                    
               paper     3STATS-be.torn(sg)                                         
                                                                                    
               ‘The paper is torn.’ (1932:137:2)                                    
                                                                                    
               [yaˊ cuˊl haˊ aˊn tłemtłeˊm]                                         
                                                                                    
          285b) ya šúl ha án ƛémƛem                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ya   šul  ha   an   ø-ƛem,ƛem                                        
                                                                                    
               that dog  his  ear  3STATS-REDUP,be.torn                             
                                                                                    
               ‘The ears of that dog are torn.’ (1932:137:2)                        
                                                                                    
               [icokēˊc]                                                            
                                                                                    
          286a) hišoké·š                                                            
                                                                                    
               hi-šoke·š                                                            
                                                                                    
               1SSTATS-be.sick                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         130                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I am sick.’ (1932:38:1)                                             
                                                                                    
               [ic-coˊkcokēc]                                                       
                                                                                    
          286b) iššókšoke·š                                                         
                                                                                    
               iš-šok,šoke·š                                                        
                                                                                    
               1PLSTATS- REDUP,be.sick                                              
                                                                                    
               ‘We are sick.’ (1932:38:2)                                           
                                                                                    
               [na nlāk]                                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          287a) ná n̥lá·k                                                           
                                                                                    
               na        n̥-la·k                                                    
                                                                                    
               you(sg)   2SSTATS-be.strong                                          
                                                                                    
               ‘You are strong.’ (1932:75:1)                                        
                                                                                    
               [nakiˊti naklaˊklāk]                                                 
                                                                                    
          287b) nakít naklákla·k                                                    
                                                                                    
               nakit     nak-,lak-la·k                                              
                                                                                    
               you(pl)   2PLSTATS-,REDUP,be.strong                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘You all are strong.’ (1932:75:1)                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [wi cakiˊdso]                                                        
                                                                                    
          288a) wí šakíco                                                           
                                                                                    
               wi   šak-Ɂic-o                                                       
                                                                                    
               I    INDEF:OBJ-wake-1SS                                              
                                                                                    
               ‘I wake someone up.’ (1932:51:2)                                     
                                                                                    
               [wi cakidsidso]                                                      
                                                                                    
          289b) wí šakkicíco                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         131                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               wi   šak-Ɂic,Ɂic-o                                                   
                                                                                    
               I    3PLOBJ-REDUP,wake-1SS                                           
                                                                                    
               ‘I wake someone up repeatedly.’ (1932:51:2)                          
                                                                                    
               [wi nec paˊ-icik taˊmco]                                             
                                                                                    
          289a) wí néš páyšik támšo                                                 
                                                                                    
               wi   neš       payš-ik        tam-š-o                                
                                                                                    
               I    wood      axe-ERG.INSTR  split-CAUS-1SS                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I split a block of wood with an axe.’ (1932:126:1)                  
                                                                                    
               [wi nēˊc tamtaˊmco]                                                  
                                                                                    
          289b) wí néš tamtámšo                                                     
                                                                                    
               wi   neš  tam,tam-š-o                                                
                                                                                    
               I    wood REDUP,split-EXT-1SS                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘I split a block of wood in many places.’                            
                                                                                    
               ‘I split many blocks of wood.’ (1932:126:1)                          
                                                                                    
               [wi caˊkiko]                                                         
                                                                                    
          290a) wí šakiko                                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               wi   šakik-o                                                         
                                                                                    
               I    wound-1SS                                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘I wound someone.’ (1932:111:1)                                      
                                                                                    
               [wi cakcaˊkiko]                                                      
                                                                                    
          290b) wí šakšákiko                                                        
                                                                                    
               wi   šak,šakik-o                                                     
                                                                                    
               I    REDUP,wound-1SS                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         132                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I wound someone in various places.’ (1932:111:1)                    
                                                                                    
               {hú yá ishāk}                                                        
                                                                                    
          291a) hú yá išá·k                                                         
                                                                                    
               hu-ø      ya   iša·k                                                 
                                                                                    
               see-IMP   that person                                                
                                                                                    
               ‘Look at that person!’ (Gatschet, 1885b:71)                          
                                                                                    
               {shak húhuyá ishák}                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          291b) šakhúhu yá išá·k                                                    
                                                                                    
               šak-hu,hu-ø         ya   iša·k                                       
                                                                                    
               3PLOBJ-,REDUP,see-IMP that person                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘Look at those people!’ (Gatschet, 1885b:71)                         
                                                                                    
          A variety of this kind of reduplication replicates the third-person plural object prefix, as in the
                                                                                    
          following example:                                                        
                                                                                    
               [taˊ-ucokcokwaˊnkit]                                                 
                                                                                    
          292) tawšokšokwánkit                                                      
                                                                                    
               taw-,šok,šok-ø-wan-kit                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               STAND-,REDUP,STH-3STATS-speak-PROG                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘He is standing and saying something repeatedly, i.e. he is preaching.’ (1932:123:2)
                                                                                    
          Very rarely, the entire verb root is reduplicated.                        
                                                                                    
               [coˊyuan]                                                            
                                                                                    
          293a) šóywan                                                              
                                                                                    
               ø-šoywan                                                             
                                                                                    
               3STATS-be.mischevious                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         133                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘He is mischevious.’ (1932:116:2)                                    
                                                                                    
               [coyuancoyuaˊn]                                                      
                                                                                    
          293b) šóywanšóywan                                                        
                                                                                    
               ø-šoywan,šoywan                                                      
                                                                                    
               3STATS-REDUP,be.mischevious                                          
                                                                                    
               ‘They are mischevious.’ (1932:116:2)                                 
                                                                                    
          Reduplication with infixation. Although examples of this kind of reduplication are not
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          numerous, it still seems to have been an active process. The only examples in active verbs are
                                                                                    
          found in one of the texts, and not through elicitation. It requires the reduplication of the verb
                                                                                    
          root, and the infixation of an element between the reduplicated parts. For stative verbs element is
                                                                                    
          universally -nak-, ‘intensivizer’, while for active verbs the regular verbal prefixes hok-
                                                                                    
          ‘reciprocal object’ and šak- ‘plural or indefinite object’ occur. The meaning of this reduplication
                                                                                    
          is an increase in the intensity of the state or increase in intensity or repetition of an action. In
                                                                                    
          Gatschet’s field notes such forms are written as one or two (rarely three) words; however, this
                                                                                    
          reduplication is written in the publication with each syllable as an independent word. The
                                                                                    
          assimilation of the ln cluster in example 290b and the kƛ cluster in 291b shows that the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          construction is a single word.                                            
                                                                                    
               [kuˊts]                                                              
                                                                                    
          294a) kuc                                                                 
                                                                                    
               ø-kuc                                                                
                                                                                    
               3STATS-be.red                                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘It is red.’ (1932:74:1)                                             
                                                                                    
               [kuˊts nak kuˊts]                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         134                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          294b) kúcnakkúc                                                           
                                                                                    
               ø-kuc,nak,kuc                                                        
                                                                                    
               3STATS-REDUP,INTENS,be.red                                           
                                                                                    
               ‘It is dark red. (1932:74:1)                                         
                                                                                    
               [liˊl]                                                               
                                                                                    
          295a) líl                                                                 
                                                                                    
               ø-lil                                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               3STATS-be.soft                                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘It is soft. (1932:76:2)                                             
                                                                                    
               [līlaklīl]                                                           
                                                                                    
          295b) líllaklíl                                                           
                                                                                    
               lil,nak,lil                                                          
                                                                                    
               REDUP,INTENS,be.soft                                                 
                                                                                    
               ‘It is very soft. (1932:76:2)                                        
                                                                                    
               [tlaˊ-u]                                                             
                                                                                    
          296a) ƛáw                                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ø-ƛaw                                                                
                                                                                    
               3STATS-be.light.in.weight                                            
                                                                                    
               ‘It is light.’ (1932:137:2)                                          
                                                                                    
               {tlá-uná tlá-u}                                                      
                                                                                    
          296b) ƛáwnaƛƛáw                                                           
                                                                                    
               ø-ƛaw-nak-ƛaw                                                        
                                                                                    
               3STATS-REDUP,INTENS,be.light.in.weight                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         135                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘It is very light.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:30)                             
                                                                                    
               [Kitsāˊk cakpiˊx̥ k yaˊ paˊm (h)okpaˊmiculat]                        
                                                                                    
          297) kicá·k šakpíhkya pámhokpámišulat                                     
                                                                                    
               kica·k-šak-pihk-ya       pam,hok,pam-iš-ul-at                        
                                                                                    
               whiskey-3PLSTATS-be.dead(pl)-and REDUP,RECIP,beat-CAUS-3PLS-PRET     
                                                                                    
               ‘They were drunk and they really beat each other up.’ (1932:20:145)  
                                                                                    
               [Taneˊ-u tuˊlkin paˊk-cakpaˊkicat]                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          298) tannéw túlkin pákšakpákišat                                          
                                                                                    
               tan-hew   tul-kin   pak,šak,pakiš-at                                 
                                                                                    
               other-PL  lake-loc  REDUP,3PLOBJ,throw-PRET                          
                                                                                    
               ‘They threw some of them again and again into the lake. (1932:20:146)
                                                                                    
          There are several examples of this form of reduplication that reduplicate the entire word rather
                                                                                    
          than just the initial CVC.                                                
                                                                                    
               [iluˊ]                                                               
                                                                                    
          299a) ilú                                                                 
                                                                                    
               ø-Ɂilu                                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               3STATS-be.hot                                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘It is hot weather.’ (1932:47:1)                                     
                                                                                    
               [eluˊ nak eluˊ]                                                      
                                                                                    
          299b) ilúnakilú                                                           
                                                                                    
               ø-Ɂilu,nak,Ɂilu                                                      
                                                                                    
               3STATS-REDUP,INTENS,be.hot                                           
                                                                                    
               ‘It is very hot weather. (1932:47:1)                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         136                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [talkoˊp]                                                            
                                                                                    
          300a) talkop                                                              
                                                                                    
               ø-talkop                                                             
                                                                                    
               3STATS-be.blue                                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘It is blue.’ (1932:125:2)                                           
                                                                                    
               [talkoˊp naˊk talkoˊp]                                               
                                                                                    
          300b) talkópnaktalkóp                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ø-talkop,nak,talkop                                                  
                                                                                    
               3STATS-REDUP,INTENS,be.blue                                          
                                                                                    
               ‘It is dark blue.’ (1932:125:2)                                      
                                                                                    
          Plurals in -m. Pluralizing a verb root with the suffix -m is not a productive process in Atakapa.
                                                                                    
          This form of pluralization takes place by replacing the last consonant of the verb root with m. If
                                                                                    
          the verb is intransitive, the plural in –m refers to the subject of the verb; if the verb is transitive, it
                                                                                    
          refers to the object of the verb. It is of interest that the neighboring language Chitimacha uses a
                                                                                    
          suffix -ma to pluralize verbs, and that this suffix also replaces the final consonant of the verb
                                                                                    
          (Hieber, 2019a:321-22; Swadesh, 1946b:117). Chitimacha pluralization in -ma also has the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          same semantic effect of pluralizing the subject of an intransitive verb, and the object of a
                                                                                    
          transitive verb, thus treating S (intransitive subject) in the same way as O (transitive object),
                                                                                    
          another indication of the ergativity of Atakapa grammar. The following list is exhaustive.
                                                                                    
          Singular  Plural    Gloss                                                 
                                                                                    
          aŋkát-š   aŋkám-š   ‘to play’                                             
                                                                                    
          hacehé-š  hacemé-š  ‘to be bad’                                           
                                                                                    
          himá·k-š  himá·m-š  ‘to mix together’                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         137                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          imíl-š    imím-š    ‘to hate’                                             
                                                                                    
          išó·l     išó·m     ‘to be small (animate)’                               
                                                                                    
          *káw-š    *kám-š    ‘to cause to put something in.’21                     
                                                                                    
          pák       pám       ‘to step on’                                          
                                                                                    
          pét-št    pém-št    ‘to be tired’                                         
                                                                                    
          púh       púm       ‘to jump’                                             
                                                                                    
          šošól-š   šošóm-š   ‘to scare’                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          tekáw-š   tekám-š   ‘to be a branch’                                      
                                                                                    
          Suppletion. Only a few verbs show plural by suppletion. Like other languages of the Southeast
                                                                                    
          (Chitimacha, Swadesh, 1946a:318; Koasati, Kimball, 1991:322-24; Chickasaw and Creek,
                                                                                    
          Fitzgerald, 2016:691-93; Yuchi, Wagner, 1934:352-53), it is verbs of motion and position that
                                                                                    
          show this kind of pluralization.                                          
                                                                                    
          Singular  Plural    Gloss                                                 
                                                                                    
          kaw       píhk      ‘to die’                                              
                                                                                    
          ké·t      núl/tóh   ‘to sit; to dwell’                                    
                                                                                    
          makáw     wiló      ‘to fall’                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          mók       náw       ‘to arrive’                                           
                                                                                    
          níhuwe    nók/nókiš ‘to lie down’                                         
                                                                                    
          tá·t      có·t      ‘to stand’                                            
                                                                                    
          tíht      yóht      ‘to be lying down’                                    
                                                                                    
          tíš       tíw       ‘to go’                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Notes                                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         138                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          1. This form is not attested in the corpus, but in inferred from such forms as hatwíwul ‘they
                                                                                    
          believe it of themselves.’                                                
                                                                                    
          2. Stative verbs without a plural form mark their subjects with the prefix šak-.
                                                                                    
          3. This is a compound verb; the construction is discussed in the section on verbal conjunction
                                                                                    
          and disjunction in the chapter on syntax.                                 
                                                                                    
          4. The initial i does not occur in the publication, but in Gatschet’s field notes. There it is
                                                                                    
          scratched out, done erroneously as he was reviewing the text with his consultant.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          5. The original dictation of this text had a dubitative form with -ehe, but a note below it says that
                                                                                    
          the form with -tikit is better.                                           
                                                                                    
          6. This form is lacking in the publication, but is reconstructed based on forms like hikétikit, ‘I
                                                                                    
          shall have.’                                                              
                                                                                    
          7. The word náhka written {naqka} and {náχka} in the field notes, is not listed under any root in
                                                                                    
          the publication. The published translation of this sentence is “if you are a smart woman, you will
                                                                                    
          not go there (or would not go there).’ although in the field notes (1885b:109), Gatschet scratched
                                                                                    
          out ‘there.’ in red. There is no negative verb, so by deduction nahka must be negative, and
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          because its location is that of an adverb, the meaning ‘must not’ is postulated. In the example
                                                                                    
          following, it and the verb are translated ‘will not tell you what,’ even though the pronoun is in
                                                                                    
          the ergative case and a focus form, so it must again be a negative, and the same meaning is
                                                                                    
          postulated.                                                               
                                                                                    
          8. The form given in the paradigm lacks the prefix iš-, clearly a slip in recording, cf. iš-icyuc-kin
                                                                                    
          ‘when we grew up.’                                                        
                                                                                    
          9. This form is questioned in the publication, probably because the usual negative for kóhš ‘to
                                                                                    
          want’ is óŋš ‘not to want.’                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         139                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          10. An example is šúl háhan ‘not having a dog’ [cuˊl haˊ-an] (1932:116:2).
                                                                                    
          11. The following are examples of this construction in the aforementioned languages:
                                                                                    
          Chitimacha:                                                               
                                                                                    
          11a) tewe·š kap kˀušti kˀan ki kap kˀetnaɁa                               
                                                                                    
               tewe·š    kap  kˀušt-i   kˀan ki   kap  kˀet-inaɁa                   
                                                                                    
               however   PVB  eat-GER   be.not in PVB  kill(pl)-AOR(2/3PLS)         
                                                                                    
               However, before it ate her, they killed it. (Swadesh, 1950: A.32.c.4)
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Koasati:                                                                  
                                                                                    
          11b) hasáykohá:lon ƚóykalą́                                               
                                                                                    
               hasáy-ko-há:lo-n    ƚóyka-l-á-V̨                                     
                                                                                    
               rain.hard-NEG-SEQ-SW return(sg)-1SS-INTENT-PHR:TERM                  
                                                                                    
               Before it rains, I will return. (Kimball, 1994:239)                  
                                                                                    
          Natchez:                                                                  
                                                                                    
          11c) wita Ɂišahkuša·t a·miNt                                              
                                                                                    
               wit-a     Ɂi-šahkuš-a·t  a·-miNt                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               day-ART   PRT-arrive-NEG be(aor)-MOD                                 
                                                                                    
               Before the day arrived… (Kimball, 2005:417)                          
                                                                                    
          12. Here the translation in the publication expresses a first-person subject. The Atakapa marks
                                                                                    
          no subject except a tacit third person subject. Either the published translation is in error, or the
                                                                                    
          subject, like that of the participle, is understood from context.         
                                                                                    
          13. Gatschet made the following comment about this example: “A son-in-law of L(ouison) was
                                                                                    
          treated this way by the Americans here, because he had married an Indian, whom they claimed to
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         140                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          be a negress. (about 1880). He was an Englishman.” This apparently refers to Ambrose
                                                                                    
          Huntington.                                                               
                                                                                    
          14. Note the lack of nominal accent in the adjectival phrases iša·k šoké·š ‘sick person,’ and šok
                                                                                    
          hacehéš hiwéw ‘something very bad.’                                       
                                                                                    
          15. In Gatschet’s field notes, the examples of comparative sentences are full of scratch-outs,
                                                                                    
          insertions, and word order changes, suggesting that such sentences were unnatural for his
                                                                                    
          consultants.                                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          16. The final h of this verb comes from the devoiced allophone of w.      
                                                                                    
          17. Compare example 262 above, where the causative of láw ‘to burn’ is láw ká, not láwi.
                                                                                    
          18. The verb ‘to break’ has the form páł intervocalically, and pál syllable-finally. This is an
                                                                                    
          example of word-final ƛ becoming l. There are also examples of this word with intervocalic l,
                                                                                    
          (pálo / páło ‘I break’) as the root was becoming regularized.             
                                                                                    
          19. A further example of this suffix may occur in iyé-c ‘to rise, of the sun,” c.f. hiyé-kiti ‘Sunrise
                                                                                    
          People; Eastern Atakapa.                                                  
                                                                                    
          20. Both the verbs šakyíkš ‘to buy something’ (also šakí·kš ) and šokšakyíkš (also šokšakí·kš) ‘to
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          sell something’ lack third-person plural object agreement, so number must be marked in the
                                                                                    
          nominal adjuct.                                                           
                                                                                    
               {shokón tanúk shakī́ksho}                                            
                                                                                    
          20a) šokón tanúk šakí·kšo                                                 
                                                                                    
               šokon tanuk šakyikš-o                                                
                                                                                    
               cow  one  buy-1SS                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I buy a cow.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:117)                                 
                                                                                    
               {shokón hé-u shakī́ksho}                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         141                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          20b) šokónhéw šakí·kšo                                                    
                                                                                    
               šokon-hew šakyikš-o                                                  
                                                                                    
               cow-PL    buy-1SS                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I buy some cows.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:117)                             
                                                                                    
          21. These roots are attested only in the derived nouns okotkáwš ‘shirt,’ pl. okotkámš, from ók-ot
                                                                                    
          káwš ‘to put something into cloth.’                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         142                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          3. NOUNS AND NOMINAL MORPHOLOGY                                           
                                                                                    
           Nouns in Atakapa are not distinguished from verbs in form, but only in function. Nouns have
                                                                                    
          two tacit features that are reflected in grammatical agreement, animacy and mass status.
                                                                                    
          Animacy. Atakapa has two adjectives that have different forms for use with animate and
                                                                                    
          inanimate nouns: mo·n (inanimate) / mó·ni (animate) ‘all,’ and hicón (inanimate) / išó·l (sg) /
                                                                                    
          išó·m ~ išó·mš (pl) (animate) ‘small.’ The use of these adjectives indicate the classes of nouns
                                                                                    
          considered animate. The words išó·l (sg) / išó·m ~ išó·mš (pl) are used to indicate small animate
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          creatures, and as such are used to describe the young of animals. Parts of the human body are
                                                                                    
          also shown by these words to be animate, as well as trees and plants. In addition, these
                                                                                    
          adjectives also are used with the words táy ‘river,’ tík ‘arrow,’ tú ‘river cane,’ kocnán ‘metal,’
                                                                                    
          and ók ‘cloth.’ This recalls the inclusion of culturally important items in the class of animates in
                                                                                    
          Algonquian languages.                                                     
                                                                                    
               šúl       ‘dog’          šú·l išó·l     ‘puppy’                      
                                                                                    
               šiwán     ‘cat’          šiwán išó·l    ‘kitten’                     
                                                                                    
               šokóŋ     ‘cow’          šokóŋ išo·l    ‘calf’                       
                                                                                    
               nohámš    ‘chicken’      nohámš išó·m   ‘chicks’                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               wóš       ‘hand’         wošišóˑl       ‘little finger’              
                                                                                    
               hiká·t    ‘foot’         hiká·t išó·m   ‘little toes’                
                                                                                    
               néš       ‘tree’         néš išó·m      ‘bushes’                     
                                                                                    
               táy       ‘river’        táy išo·l      ‘bayou’                      
                                                                                    
               tík       ‘arrow’        tík išó·m      ‘bullets’                    
                                                                                    
               tú        ‘river cane’   tú išó·mš      ‘arrow shafts’               
                                                                                    
               kocnán    ‘metal’        kucnán išó·l   ‘iron nail’                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         143                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ók        ‘cloth’        ók išo·m       ‘thread’                     
                                                                                    
          The word néš ‘tree’ is inanimate when it means ‘wood,’ as shown by its use with the verb hicón
                                                                                    
          ‘to be small (inanimate): néš hicón ‘stick.’                              
                                                                                    
          Mass status. Certain nouns in Atakapa are considered mass nouns, and as such always require
                                                                                    
          a plural adjective. Examples are té·š ‘hair of the head;’ compare kíš, ‘woman,’ and šít ‘Spanish
                                                                                    
          moss,’ compare šokón ‘cow.’                                               
                                                                                    
               té·š mókmok ‘short hair’                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               kíš mók   ‘a short woman’     kéš mókmok     ‘short women’           
                                                                                    
               šít mélme·l ‘black (dry) Spanish moss’                               
                                                                                    
               šokónmé·l ‘buffalo (black cow)’ šokonmélme·l ‘buffaloes’             
                                                                                    
          Because of the scarcity of data, it is not always possible to determine the animacy or mass status
                                                                                    
          of a particular noun.                                                     
                                                                                    
          Ordering of nominal morphology. Noun affix ordering is much simpler than verb affix
                                                                                    
          ordering. There is a single prefix and there are only three suffixes. The following is the template
                                                                                    
          for the noun phrase:                                                      
                                                                                    
          plural(šak) - ROOT - plural(hew) - case - focus                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          The two plural affixes are mutually exclusive; if one is used, the other does not occur.
                                                                                    
          Combinations of affixes are extremely rare in the data. The plural -héw has been found only in
                                                                                    
          the absolutive case, never with the ergative or any of the locative cases. The only case marker
                                                                                    
          that the focus form has been found with is the ergative. All this seems to be the result of
                                                                                    
          inadequate data.                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         144                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Nominal cases. The five mutually exclusive overt case markers are the only elements unique to
                                                                                    
          nouns. Case markers are to be distinguished from postpositions by the impossibility of them
                                                                                    
          being independent verbs, unlike true postpositions. These suffixes are the following:
                                                                                    
          Ergative       -ik                                                        
                                                                                    
          Absolutive     -ø                                                         
                                                                                    
          Directional    -ot                                                        
                                                                                    
          Locative       -kin                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Elative        -ike                                                       
                                                                                    
          Inessive       -ip                                                        
                                                                                    
          Ergative case. This case is polysemous. It marks the nominal or pronominal agent/subject of a
                                                                                    
          transitive verb, but only if the direct object is human and animate. It also marks an instrument, if
                                                                                    
          the noun refers to an object with which an action is done. Finally, it marks causes, nouns which
                                                                                    
          are the reasons for an action occurring. See the chapter on syntax for a further discussion of
                                                                                    
          ergativity.                                                               
                                                                                    
            The existence of the ergative case was not recognized by Gatschet (nor by Swanton) because
                                                                                    
          it did not follow the pattern of nominative-accusative marking familiar from the Classical
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          languages of Europe. The common presence of the absolutive state in Atakapa clearly led him to
                                                                                    
          consider noun phrases in the language to be analytic, and in his field notes he removed or
                                                                                    
          questioned a number of genuine forms because of their synthetic nature. Ergative forms of
                                                                                    
          pronouns are especially rare in the data because Gatschet often wrote down columns of pronouns
                                                                                    
          before asking for the verbs, and rarely changed what he had previously written when his
                                                                                    
          consultants said something different.                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         145                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            Because the ergative case marks an agent, it is not used on the subjects of verbs whose
                                                                                    
          subjects are not considered agents of the verbal activity. The first two examples show that non-
                                                                                    
          human nouns as subjects of transitive verbs do not take the ergative when the objects are non-
                                                                                    
          human, but rather are in the absolutive state.                            
                                                                                    
               [ciwaˊn anpāˊkc koˊnkit]                                             
                                                                                    
          301) šiwán anpákš kóŋkit                                                  
                                                                                    
               šiwan-ø   anpakš-ø  ø-koŋ-kit                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               cat-ABS   mouse-ABS 3STATS-seize-PROG(SG)                            
                                                                                    
               ‘The cat is catching a mouse.’ (1932:112)                            
                                                                                    
               [loˊñloñc neˊc kōˊñět]                                               
                                                                                    
          302) lóŋloŋš néš kóŋat                                                    
                                                                                    
               loŋloŋš-ø neš-ø     ø-koŋ-at                                         
                                                                                    
               thunder-ABS tree-ABS 3STATS-seize-PRET                               
                                                                                    
               ‘Lightning struck a tree.’ (1932:71)                                 
                                                                                    
          In example 303, the ergative case occurs directly on a noun, in 304 and 305 its occurrence on the
                                                                                    
          following adjective shows that the noun-adjective complex is considered to be a semantic unit
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          for the purposes of case marking.                                         
                                                                                    
               [Taˊkapo icāˊk hatwiˊvat, caˊ-ik cukteˊ-i hatse-eˊc miˊculat]        
                                                                                    
          303) tákapa išá·k hatwíwat šáik šoktéy hacehéš míšulat                    
                                                                                    
               takapa    išak      hat-wiw-at     ša-ik               šoktey        
                                                                                    
               Atakapa   people    REFLEX-believe-PRET someone-ERG.AGNT             
                                                                                    
               medicine                                                             
                                                                                    
               haceheš   ø-miš-ul-at                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         146                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               bad(sg)   3OBJ-give-3PLS-PRET                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘The Atakapa people believed that some people had given them bad medicine.’
                                                                                    
               (1932:17:112-13)                                                     
                                                                                    
               [Hilaˊyi taˊxnik paˊmat]                                             
                                                                                    
          304) hiláy tánik pámat                                                    
                                                                                    
               hilay tan-ik        ø-pam-ø-at                                       
                                                                                    
               wife other-ERG.AGNT 3SOBJ-beat-3SS-PRET                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘Another wife beat him.’ (1932:10:17)                                
                                                                                    
               {ishlá-ush tátik nimá-at}                                            
                                                                                    
          305) hišláwš tá·tik nimáat                                                
                                                                                    
               hišlawš   ta·t-ik        ø-nima-ø-at                                 
                                                                                    
               fever     yellow-ERG.AGNT 3SOBJ-kill-3SS-PRET                        
                                                                                    
               ‘Yellow fever killed her.’ (Gatschet,1885b:163)                      
                                                                                    
               [wi k cakiˊnu]                                                       
                                                                                    
          306) wí·k šakínu                                                          
                                                                                    
               wi-ik     šak-in-o                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               I-ERG.AGNT 3PLOBJ-ask-1SS                                            
                                                                                    
               ‘I ask them.’ (1932:47:2)                                            
                                                                                    
               [kucmeˊlik nimaˊat]                                                  
                                                                                    
          307) kušmé·lik nimáat                                                     
                                                                                    
               kušme·l-ik          ø-nima-ø-at                                      
                                                                                    
               black.person-ERG.AGNT 3SOBJ-kill-3SS-PRET                            
                                                                                    
               ‘A black person killed him.’ (1932:91:2)1                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         147                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               {wi hitét hikipámĕt}                                                 
                                                                                    
          308) wi hité·tik hipámat                                                  
                                                                                    
               wi hite·t-ik        hi-pam-ø-at                                      
                                                                                    
               my father-ERG.AGNT  1SOBJ-beat-3SS-PRET                              
                                                                                    
               ‘My father beat me.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:55)                            
                                                                                    
               {odsé hikitsáwet}                                                    
                                                                                    
          309) océhik hicáwat                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               oceh-ik        hi-caw-ø-at                                           
                                                                                    
               snake-ERG.AGNT 1SOBJ-bite-3SS-PRET                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘A snake bit me.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:56)                               
                                                                                    
               {shāk hiwálshat}                                                     
                                                                                    
          310) šá·k hiwálšat                                                        
                                                                                    
               ša-ik          hi-walš-ø-at                                          
                                                                                    
               someone-ERG.AGNT 1SOBJ-fan-3SS-PRET                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘Someone fanned me.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:32)                            
                                                                                    
          The ergative case is also used to indicate instruments, nouns with which actions are done. The
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          instrumental verbal prefix ik- (see above) seems to be a parallel development.
                                                                                    
               [wi caknoˊmc puˊckin wāˊñ aˊñkāˊmctit coˊktokcik]                    
                                                                                    
          322) wi šaknómš púškin waŋaŋkámštit šóktokšik                             
                                                                                    
               wi   šak-nomš puškin ø-waŋ-aŋkamš-tit             šoktokš-ik         
                                                                                    
               my   PL-child outside 3STATS-go.about-play(pl)-PROGRESS(PL) ball-ERG.INSTR
                                                                                    
               ‘My children are going about outside playing with a ball.’ (1932:13:63)
                                                                                    
               [wi nec paˊ-icik taˊmco]                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         148                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          323) wí néš páyšik támšo                                                  
                                                                                    
               wi   néš       páyš-ik   tám-š-o                                     
                                                                                    
               I    wood      axe-ERG.INSTR split-CAUS-1SS                          
                                                                                    
               ‘I split a block of wood with an axe.’ (1932:126:1)                  
                                                                                    
          The ergative case also expresses causes and sources:                      
                                                                                    
               [īclaˊ-uc tāˊtik kaˊwat]                                             
                                                                                    
          313) hišláwš tá·tik káwat                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               hišlawš   ta·t-ik        ø-kaw-at                                    
                                                                                    
               fever     yellow-ERG.INSTR 3SSTATS-die-PRET                          
                                                                                    
               ‘She died of yellow fever. (1932:15:88)                              
                                                                                    
               [eluˊik hicok’hēˊcat]                                                
                                                                                    
          314) ilúik hišoké·šat                                                     
                                                                                    
               ilu-ik         hi-šoke·š-at                                          
                                                                                    
               heat-ERG.INSTR 1SSTATS-be.sick-PRET                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘I became sick from the heat.’ (1932:47:2)                           
                                                                                    
               {wá-ush hikiláwĕt}                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          315) wáwšik hiláwat                                                       
                                                                                    
               wawš-ik        hi-law-at                                             
                                                                                    
               steam-ERG.INSTR 1SSTATS-burn-PRET                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I got burned by the steam.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:55)2                   
                                                                                    
               [kutsnăˊn tuˊik kaˊ]                                                 
                                                                                    
          316) kucnán túik ká                                                       
                                                                                    
               kucnan    tu-ik          ka                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         149                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               knife     cane-ERG.INSTR made                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘knife made of cane’ (1932:18:128)                                   
                                                                                    
               [luˊ itka aˊmcne]                                                    
                                                                                    
          317) lúik ká ámšne                                                        
                                                                                    
               lu-ik          ka   am-š-ne                                          
                                                                                    
               clay-ERG.INSTR made drink-CAUS-GER                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘drinking vessel made of clay’ (1928:77:2)                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Absolutive. This is unmarked, and it is the basic state of an Atakapa noun. It is somewhat
                                                                                    
          misleading to treat it as a case, for unlike a language like Natchez, which has a marked
                                                                                    
          absolutive case, there is no case marking for the absolutive in Atakapa. A zero marker is used in
                                                                                    
          the examples below, but it is purely formal, and does not imply the former existence of an overt
                                                                                    
          form. The absolutive is the form of noun used as the subject of an intransitive verb, the subject
                                                                                    
          of a transitive stative verb, the object of a transitive verb, either active or stative, and as a citation
                                                                                    
          form.                                                                     
                                                                                    
               [Yukiˊti Icaˊt toˊkc coxkoˊ-i waˊci kaˊwĕt]                          
                                                                                    
          318) yukhíti iša·ttókš šokóy wáši káwat                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               yukhiti   iša·ttókš šokoy waši-ø   ø-kawat                           
                                                                                    
               Indian    PN        chief old-ABS  3STATS-die-PRET                   
                                                                                    
               ‘The Indian, Iša·ttokš, the old chief, died.’ (1932:13:54)           
                                                                                    
          319) čákta yukhíti iša·thatyíncne hinákka šakkéat                         
                                                                                    
               čakta3    yukhiti   iša·thatyincne-ø hinakka šak-ke-at               
                                                                                    
               Choctaw   Indian    crown-ABS      like      3PLSTATS-have-PRET      
                                                                                    
               ‘The Choctaw Indians had crowns in the same way.’ (1932:19:136-37)   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         150                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Icāk cokcaktsăñc konˊuˊhts]                                         
                                                                                    
          320) iša·k šokšakcáŋš kóŋ úhc                                             
                                                                                    
               iša·k     šok-šak-caŋš-ø koŋ  ø-uhc                                  
                                                                                    
               person    STH-3PLO-steal -ABS sieze 3PLSTATS-be.able                 
                                                                                    
               ‘They can catch the thief.’ (1932:13:61)                             
                                                                                    
               [Iˊcak capiˊxk caklaˊwiulhahat]                                      
                                                                                    
          321) iša·k šappíhk šakláwiulháhat                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               iša·k     šak-pihk-ø     šak-law-i-ul-hah-at                         
                                                                                    
               person    PL-die(pl)-ABS 3PLOBJ-burn-CAUS-3PLS-NEG-PRET              
                                                                                    
               ‘They did not burn the dead.’ (1932:19:140)                          
                                                                                    
          Note that, as in the Southeastern language Natchez (Kimball, 2005:443), if the first verb in a
                                                                                    
          series of verbs is intransitive, then the subject noun is in the absolutive case. The following is a
                                                                                    
          textual example.                                                          
                                                                                    
               [Yuk’hiˊti ipcōˊk oˊk yaˊ peˊneat]                                   
                                                                                    
          322) yukhíti ipšók ókya péniat                                            
                                                                                    
               yukhiti   ipšok-ø   ok=ya     ø-peni-ø-at                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Indian    doctor-ABS come=and 3OBJ-cure-3SS-PRET                     
                                                                                    
               The Indian doctor came and cured her. (1932:55-56)                   
                                                                                    
          Directional case. The directional case is marked by the suffix -ot. Frequently it is written -ut,
                                                                                    
          the latter a weakened form occurring after an accented syllable. Most examples in the texts and
                                                                                    
          dictionary are written separately from the noun. This is based on Gatschet’s field notes, for after
                                                                                    
          he decided that the case marker was a postposition, he often went back and separated it from the
                                                                                    
          noun it was written together with, and added an accent. However, -ot is not a postposition, as
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         151                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          unlike true postpositions it never occurs verbalized. The basic meaning of the directional case is
                                                                                    
          action happening to or towards the noun to which it is attached. In terms of grammar, it has both
                                                                                    
          dative and locative functions.                                            
                                                                                    
               [Iyuˊtskin hac okwaˊñc oˊt tiˊcat yaˊ kaˊwat]                        
                                                                                    
          323) hiyúckin há·š hokwáŋšot tíšatya káwat                                
                                                                                    
               hi-yuc-kin          ha-iš     hokwaŋš-ot ø-tiš-at=ya                 
                                                                                    
               1SSTAS-be.grown-WHEN he-FOC   war-DIR   3STATS-go-PRET=and           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ø-kaw-at                                                             
                                                                                    
               3STATS-die-PRET                                                      
                                                                                    
               ‘When I was grown, he went to the war and died.’ (1932:16-17:104-05) 
                                                                                    
               [Haˊlkin tsīˊpcat Yuk’hiˊti Tuˊl oˊt]                                
                                                                                    
          324) hálkin cípšat yukhíti túlot                                          
                                                                                    
               halkin    cipš-ø-at      yukhiti   tul-ot                            
                                                                                    
               afterwards move-3SS-PRET Indian    lake-DIR                          
                                                                                    
               ‘Afterwards he moved to Lake Prien (Indian Lake).’ (1932:16:95)      
                                                                                    
          The directional case is also used to indicate or disambiguate indirect objects. In the following
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          example, the verb išmišat can mean both ‘he gave it to us’ or 'we gave it to him,’ as the object
                                                                                    
          prefixes in the preterite mode also serve as subject prefixes. The directional case then
                                                                                    
          disambiguates the meaning.                                                
                                                                                    
               [ha yuˊkit ut icmiˊcat]                                              
                                                                                    
          325) há yukítot išmíšat                                                   
                                                                                    
               ha   yukit-ot  iš-miš-ø-at                                           
                                                                                    
               he   we-DIR    1PLO-give-3SS-PRET                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         152                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘He gave it to us.’ (1932:80:2)                                      
                                                                                    
          The directional case sometimes has a meaning ‘in regard to; pertaining to; belonging to,’ as in
                                                                                    
          the following textual examples.                                           
                                                                                    
               [Loˊ yukiˊti haˊl cox̥ koˊyit yuk’hit cakicaˊk ut]                   
                                                                                    
          326) ló yukhíti halšokóyat yukhitšakiša·kot                               
                                                                                    
               lo   yukhiti   ø-hal-šokoy-at      yukhit-šak-iša·k-ot               
                                                                                    
               PN   Indian    3STATS-be.last-be.chief-PRET Indian-PL-person-DIR     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘Lo was the last Indian chief pertaining to the Indian people.’ (1932:10:28)
                                                                                    
               [Wāˊñ-pum yaˊ kic tanuˊk taˊxn ut ikāt paˊkĕt]                       
                                                                                    
          327) wáŋpúmya kíš tanúk tánot iká·t pákat                                 
                                                                                    
               waŋ-pum=ya     kiš       tanuk tan-ot                                
                                                                                    
               go.about-dance=and woman one  another-DIR foot                       
                                                                                    
               hika·t ø-pak-ø-at                                                    
                                                                                    
               3OBJ-step.on-3SS-PRET                                                
                                                                                    
               ‘They were going about dancing, and one woman stepped on the foot belonging to
                                                                                    
               another.’ (1932:20:141-142)                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          The first-person singular pronoun wi has the unique directional form wéhet, which also takes the
                                                                                    
          form wé·t. The following are the only attested examples:                  
                                                                                    
               [yaˊ icāk weˊhet ivivhaˊhĕt]                                         
                                                                                    
          328) ya išá·k wéhet hiwíwháhat                                            
                                                                                    
               ya   išak      wehet     hi-wiw-ø-hah-at                             
                                                                                    
               that person    I(DIR)    1SO-believe-3SS-NEG-PRET                    
                                                                                    
               ‘That person did not believe me.’ (1932:150:1)                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         153                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [wēt hihaˊyuĕt]                                                      
                                                                                    
          329) wé·t hiháyuat                                                        
                                                                                    
               wehet     hi-hayu-ø-at                                               
                                                                                    
               I(DIR)    1SO-laugh.at-3SS-PRET                                      
                                                                                    
               ‘He laughed at me.’ (1932:37:2)                                      
                                                                                    
               [weˊhet himiˊcat]                                                    
                                                                                    
          330) wéhet himíšat                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               wehet     hi-miš-ø-at                                                
                                                                                    
               I(DIR)    1SO-give-3SS-PRET                                          
                                                                                    
               ‘He gave it to me.’ (1932:80:2)                                      
                                                                                    
          All three of these example show the directional case of the pronoun disambiguating a verb, as
                                                                                    
          hiwíwháhat can mean both ‘I did not believe him’ and ‘he did not believe me,’ hiháyuat can
                                                                                    
          mean ‘I laughed at him,’ and ‘he laughed at me,’ and himíšat can mean ‘I gave it to him,’ and ‘he
                                                                                    
          gave it to me.’ The expected directional case form wíot also occurs.      
                                                                                    
          Locative case. This case is marked by the suffix -kin. It Indicates that an action is taking place
                                                                                    
          in a static location, with little or no movement. It can also express temporal location, as in
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          example 333.                                                              
                                                                                    
               [Yukiˊt nuˊnkin puˊm ichāˊxc a itiyiˊlc]                             
                                                                                    
          331) yukít núŋkin púm išháhš a itiyílš                                    
                                                                                    
               yukit nuŋ-kin  pum       iš-hahš        a    itiyilš                 
                                                                                    
               our  village-LOC dance   1PLSTATS-not.have this month                
                                                                                    
               ‘We are not having a dance in our village this month.’ (1932:13:53)  
                                                                                    
               [Viˊvulat iˊcak capiˊx̥ k taneˊ-u okcak’huˊ-ulat. Aˊnkin tiˊx̥ kin ok-huˊ-ulat]
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         154                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          332) wíwulat iša·k šappíhk tannéw okšakhúulat áŋkin tíhkin okhúulat       
                                                                                    
               wiw-ul-at      iša·k     šak-pihk  tan-hew                           
                                                                                    
               believe-3PLS-PRET person PL-die(pl) other-PL                         
                                                                                    
               ok-šak-hu-ul-at          aŋ-kin    ø-tiht-kin                        
                                                                                    
               COME.AND-3PLO-see-3PLS-PRET house-LOC 3STATS-lie-WHEN                
                                                                                    
               ok-hu-ul-at                                                          
                                                                                    
               COME.AND-See-3PLS-PRET                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘They believed that other dead people came to see them; they came to see
                                                                                    
               him while he was lying in the house.’ (1932:18:121-21)               
                                                                                    
               [haˊl yiˊlkin imōˊculat]                                             
                                                                                    
          333) hál yílkin himó·šulat                                                
                                                                                    
               hal  yil-kin   himo·š-ul-at                                          
                                                                                    
               next day-LOC   bury-3PLS-PRET                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘On the next day, they buried him/her.’ (1932:18:124)                
                                                                                    
          It is notable that the locative suffix -kin is homophonous with, if not identical to, the suffix -kin,
                                                                                    
          ‘while, when,’ one of the markers of the subordinate mode. While a case suffix cannot be
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          verbalized on its own, it is possible for a noun in the locative case to be verbalized, as in the
                                                                                    
          following example.                                                        
                                                                                    
               [Haˊ nuˊk iyāˊñ imōˊcti(xt) yuk’hiˊti cakimōc-neˊkin haˊ]            
                                                                                    
          334) há nuk iyáŋ himó·štíht yukhíti šakhimo·šné·kinháh                    
                                                                                    
               ha   nuk  iyaŋ ø-himo·š-tiht       yukhiti                           
                                                                                    
               she  alone there 3STATS-be.buried-lie(sg) Indian                     
                                                                                    
               šakhimo·šne·-kin-hah                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         155                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               3STATS-be.cemetery-LOC-NEG                                           
                                                                                    
               ‘She alone lies buried there. She is not in the Indian cemetery.’ (1932:15:89-90)
                                                                                    
          Elative case. This case, marked with the suffix -ike, indicates that something is coming from the
                                                                                    
          noun to which it is suffixed. The first example is the only one from a natural text. Note that the
                                                                                    
          sequence ii in example 338 collapses to long i.                           
                                                                                    
               [kaukaˊ-u aˊm’n aˊnike ntaˊhĕntat]                                   
                                                                                    
          335) kawkáw ámn̥ ánike n̥ táhn̥ tat                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               kawkaw    ø-am-n̥        an-ike    ø-n̥tah-n̥t-at                    
                                                                                    
               water     3STATS-drink-WHEN ear-EL 3STATS-come.out-CONTIN-PRET       
                                                                                    
               ‘When he drank water, it kept on coming out of his ears. (1932:10:19-20)
                                                                                    
               [yā icak akipai-iˊke ōt]                                             
                                                                                    
          336) ya išá·k akipáyike ók                                                
                                                                                    
               ya   iša·k     akipay-ike ok-ø                                       
                                                                                    
               that person    south-EL  come-3SS                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘That man comes from the south.’ (1932:24:1)                         
                                                                                    
               {wi ipăn payóket tá-i hétsike}                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          337) wi ipán payókat táy hécike                                           
                                                                                    
               wi   ipan      pay-ok-ø-at         tay  hec-ike                      
                                                                                    
               my   male.cousin BACK-come-3SS-PRET river big-EL                     
                                                                                    
               ‘My cousin has come back from the Mississippi River.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:48)
                                                                                    
               [hikīˊke iˊcak]                                                      
                                                                                    
          338) hikí·ke išà·k                                                        
                                                                                    
               hiki-ike  ø-išà·k                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         156                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               west-EL   3STATS-be.person                                           
                                                                                    
               ‘He is a man from the west.’ (1932: 40:2)                            
                                                                                    
          Inessive case. This case is marked with the suffix -ip. The inessive case indicates that
                                                                                    
          something is within an area, rather than being located statically.        
                                                                                    
               [nec hicoˊmckin yuk’hiˊti tulip lōˊx̥kin iwāˊt’n hūˊnst]             
                                                                                    
          339) neš hišómškin yukhíti túlip lókkin iwá·tn húnst                      
                                                                                    
               neš  hišomš-kin yukhiti  tul-ip    lok-kin                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               tree small-LOC Indian    lake-INESS prairie-LOC                      
                                                                                    
               ø-iwa·t-n           hu-nšt                                           
                                                                                    
               3STATS-move.hither-WHEN see-CUSTOM                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘They customarily see it (the Skin-Desirer) in the brush around Lake Prien (Indian
                                                                                    
               Lake), when it moves towards them in the prairie.’ (1932:11:35)      
                                                                                    
               [nē mak oˊtsip tiˊcta wi itēt teweˊta]                               
                                                                                    
          340) ne·mak ocip tišta wi ite·t tiwe·ta                                   
                                                                                    
               ne·mak    oc-ip     tiš-ta    wi   ite·t     tiwe·-ta                
                                                                                    
               mountain  on-INESS  go(sg)-PCPL my father    be.with-PCPL            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I am to go into the mountains in order to be with my father.’ (1932:78:1)
                                                                                    
          The inessive case has a secondary meaning of ‘by means of; using.’ It is a kind of instrumental,
                                                                                    
          but only used with nouns that cannot be physically handled.               
                                                                                    
               [icak heˊ-u hakit eˊñip cakwaˊ-uco]                                  
                                                                                    
          341) iša·k héw hakit é·ŋip šakwáhušo                                      
                                                                                    
               iša·k     hew  hakit e·ŋ-ip   šak-wahuš-o                            
                                                                                    
               person    many their name-INESS 3PLO-call-1SS                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         157                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I call many people by their names.’ (1932:31:1)                     
                                                                                    
               [haˊ icāˊk luˊkin tiktāt temaˊkip]                                   
                                                                                    
          342) á išá·k lúkin tiktá·t temákip                                        
                                                                                    
               a    iša·k     lu-kin    tik-ta·t-ø     temak-ip                     
                                                                                    
               this person    mud-LOC   go.and-stand-3SS knee-INESS                 
                                                                                    
               ‘This man goes and stands up to his knees in mud.’ (1932:129:2)      
                                                                                    
               [tsanuˊkip iteˊ-u-iciˊko taˊ-i kipaˊxci]                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          343) canúkip itéwišího táy kipáhši                                        
                                                                                    
               canuk-ip  itew-iših-o    tay  kipahši                                
                                                                                    
               horse-INESS ride-ford-1SS river across                               
                                                                                    
               ‘I ford across the river riding on a horse.’ (1932:119:1)            
                                                                                    
               [tuˊpoˊ-ipwaˊñ / tuˊpoˊpwān]                                         
                                                                                    
          344) tupóhipwáŋ / tupó·pwáŋ                                               
                                                                                    
               tu-poh-ip-waŋ                                                        
                                                                                    
               boat-smoke-INESS-go.about                                            
                                                                                    
               ‘steamboat’ (1932:105:2)                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          The inessive case has a unique meaning when used on numerals, where it means ‘N times.’
                                                                                    
               [Itiˊ tanuˊkip yiˊl tūt nēn ōˊl paˊi moˊhat]                         
                                                                                    
          345) ití tanúkip yíl tútnan ó·l paymóhat                                  
                                                                                    
               ití  tanuk-ip  yil  tutnan    o·l  pay-moh-ø-at                      
                                                                                    
               night one-INESS day before    near BACK-return-3SS-PRET              
                                                                                    
               ‘Once at night, just before daybreak, she returned back.’ (1932:17:108-09)
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         158                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          The inessive case is also used on the initial noun of certain compounds. In this usage, the noun
                                                                                    
          in the inessive case sets a limit on the location of the occurrence of the noun to which the
                                                                                    
          compound refers.                                                          
                                                                                    
               [aˊyip teˊxlk taˊlkop]                                               
                                                                                    
          346) áyip téɬk talkòp                                                     
                                                                                    
               ay-ip          teƛk      talkop                                      
                                                                                    
               swamp-INESS    flower    blue                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘marsh lily,’ lit. ‘the blue flower found within the swamp.’ (1932:23:1)
                                                                                    
               [kaˊkip hiyeˊn]                                                      
                                                                                    
          347) kákip hiyén                                                          
                                                                                    
               kak-ip hiyen                                                         
                                                                                    
               forest-INESS hog                                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘opossum,’ lit. ‘the hog that is found within the forest.’ (1932:56:2)
                                                                                    
               [nûñ-uˊcip cokoˊ-i]                                                  
                                                                                    
          348) nuŋúšip šokóy                                                        
                                                                                    
               nuŋuš-ip  šokoy                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               city-INESS chief                                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘judge,’ lit. ‘the chief that is found within the city.’ (1932:60:2) 
                                                                                    
          The inessive case suffix has a homophonous suffix -ip used in the subordinate mode of verbs
                                                                                    
          with the meaning ‘because.’                                               
                                                                                    
          Noun pluralization. Plural is primarily a verbal category in Atakapa, rather than a nominal one,
                                                                                    
          as in the following example in which the plurality of the subject and the object is marked entirely
                                                                                    
          on the verb.                                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         159                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               {kiwílsh yukíti shakónshûl}                                          
                                                                                    
          349) kiwilš yukhiti šakoŋšul                                              
                                                                                    
               kiwilš         yukhiti   šak-oŋš-ul                                  
                                                                                    
               white.person   Indian    3PLO-not.like-3PLS                          
                                                                                    
               ‘White people do not like the Indians.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:80)         
                                                                                    
          Even then, if the context is clear, plurality of a noun is simply assumed, as in the following
                                                                                    
          textual example:                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Tchaˊkta yuk’hiti icāˊt atyiˊnsne hinaˊka cakeˊat]                  
                                                                                    
          350) čákta yukhíti iša·thatyíncne hinákka šakkéat                         
                                                                                    
               čakta     yukhiti   iša·t-hat-yinc-ne        hinakka                 
                                                                                    
               Choctaw   Indian    head-REFLEX-wrap.around-GER like                 
                                                                                    
               šak-ke-at                                                            
                                                                                    
               3PLSTATS-have-PRET                                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘The Choctaw Indians (plural marked on verb) had crowns (plural assumed) in the same
                                                                                    
               way.’ (1932:19:136-37)                                               
                                                                                    
          Nonetheless, there is a limited degree of noun pluralization in Atakapa. This consists of four
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kinds: prefixed pluralization, suffixed pluralization, adjectival pluralization, and irregular
                                                                                    
          pluralization.                                                            
                                                                                    
          Prefixed pluralization. A seemingly productive way to form a plural in Atakapa is to prefix
                                                                                    
          šak- to the noun. This prefix is homophonous with, and probably identical to, the third-person
                                                                                    
          plural object prefix šak-. The following list is exhaustive.4             
                                                                                    
          Singular                 Plural                                           
                                                                                    
          ipšók     doctor         šakipšók       doctors                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         160                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          išá·k     person         šakišá·k       people; relatives                 
                                                                                    
          kíŋ       pet            šakkíŋ         pets                              
                                                                                    
          lúš       fish scale     šaklúš         fish scales                       
                                                                                    
          níl       grandchild     šakníl         grandchildren                     
                                                                                    
          noknáw    wing feather   šaknoknáw      wing feathers                     
                                                                                    
          nómš      child          šaknómš        children                          
                                                                                    
          šó        seed           šakšó          seeds                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          šokóy     chief          šakšokóy       chiefs                            
                                                                                    
          The few attested examples suggest that a plural noun requires a plural verb.
                                                                                    
               [ha cakicāˊk tsīˊpsulat hiweˊvc tanuˊk maˊ-i]                        
                                                                                    
          351) ha šakišá·k cípšulat hiwéwš tanúk máy                                
                                                                                    
               ha   šak-iša·k cipš-ul-at     hiwewš    tanuk may                    
                                                                                    
               his  PL-person move-3PLS-PRET measure   one  away                    
                                                                                    
               ‘His relatives moved a mile away.’ (1932:19:138-39)                  
                                                                                    
          Suffixed pluralization. There is only one suffix that marks the plural, -héw, derived from the
                                                                                    
          independent verb héw, ‘to be many.’ Many of the examples collected by Gatschet are
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ambiguous; that is, they can be understood either as plurals or as multiple verb constructions
                                                                                    
          when the pluralized noun is the subject of the sentence and directly precedes the verb, as in the
                                                                                    
          two analyses of the following example.                                    
                                                                                    
               [otseˊ heˊ-u ciˊutiutit]                                             
                                                                                    
          352a) océhhéw šíwtiwtit                                                   
                                                                                    
               océh-héw  ø-šíw-tiw-tit                                              
                                                                                    
               snake-PL  3STATS-crawl-go(pl)-PROG(PL)                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         161                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘The snakes are going crawling.’                                     
                                                                                    
          352b) océh héwšíwtiwtit                                                   
                                                                                    
               océh      ø-héw-šíw-tiw-tit                                          
                                                                                    
               snake     3STATS-be.many-crawl-go(pl)-PROG(PL)                       
                                                                                    
               ‘Many snakes are going crawling.’ (1932:99:1)                        
                                                                                    
          If the noun used with -héw is the object of a transitive verb, it is a plural, and not a multiple verb
                                                                                    
          construction, as if -héw were a verb, it would have a different subject, and multiple verb
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          constructions require the same subject.                                   
                                                                                    
               [neˊc heˊu caktaˊmo]                                                 
                                                                                    
          353) néšhéw šaktámo                                                       
                                                                                    
               néš-héw   šak-tám-o                                                  
                                                                                    
               tree-PL   3PLO-climb-1SS                                             
                                                                                    
               ‘I climb trees.’ (1932:39:2)                                         
                                                                                    
               [wi cokiuˊlc heˊ-u keˊ-u huˊnto]                                     
                                                                                    
          354) wi šokyúlšhéw kéwhún̥to                                              
                                                                                    
               wi   šokyulš-hew kew-hu-n̥t-o·                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               I    book-PL   SIT-read-CONTIN-PHR.TERM                              
                                                                                    
               ‘I am going to sit and read books.’ (1932:39:2)                      
                                                                                    
          The suffix -héw pluralizes a noun-adjective sequence when the adjective does not have a plural
                                                                                    
          form of its own.                                                          
                                                                                    
               [kakauˊ hidsoˊm heˊ-u cak’huˊo]                                      
                                                                                    
          355) kakáw hicónhéw šakhúo                                                
                                                                                    
               kakaw hicon-hew šak-hu-o                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         162                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               sun  small-PL  3PLO-see-1SS                                          
                                                                                    
               ‘I see the stars.’ (1932:42:2)                                       
                                                                                    
          In the texts, there is an unambiguous example of this suffix; it is used as the plural of tán ‘some;
                                                                                    
          other,’ and the cluster /nh/ assimilates to /nn/ and the accent shifts to the final syllable, showing
                                                                                    
          that this indeed is a plural suffix.                                      
                                                                                    
               [Taneˊ-u tuˊlkin paˊk-cakpaˊkicat.]                                  
                                                                                    
          356) tannéw túlkin pákšakpákišat                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               tan-hew   tul-kin   pak,šak,pak-iš-at                                
                                                                                    
               some-PL   lake-loc  REDUP,3PLOBJ,throw.in-CAUS-PRET                  
                                                                                    
               ‘Some of them they threw again and again into the lake.’ (1932:20:146)
                                                                                    
          Another example is the interrogative pronoun šinnéw ‘who (pl);’ however the singular root *šin-
                                                                                    
          is not attested.                                                          
                                                                                    
          Adjectival pluralization. Several nouns in Atakapa are formed of a compound between a noun
                                                                                    
          and an adjective. Pluralization of these nouns is done by pluralizing the adjectival part of the
                                                                                    
          compound. This is another productive method of noun pluralization.        
                                                                                    
               Singular                 Plural                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               kušmé·l 5 ‘black person’ kušmélme·l     mé·l ‘be black’              
                                                                                    
               kiškóp    ‘old woman’    keškópkop 6    kóp  ‘be white’              
                                                                                    
               iša·kkúc 7 ‘Indian’      iša·kkúckuc    kúc  ‘be red’                
                                                                                    
               noktewmé·l ‘goose’       noktewmélme·l  mé·l ‘be black’              
                                                                                    
               šokommé·l ‘bison’        šokommélme·l   mé·l ‘be black’              
                                                                                    
               iša·kkáw 8 ‘white person’ iša·kšappíhk  káw / šappíhk ‘be dead’      
                                                                                    
          A noun pluralized in this fashion also requires a plural verb.            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         163                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Samtiˊ hitiˊ kuˊcmelmēl puˊm kaˊ-ulat]                              
                                                                                    
          357) samtí ití kúšmélme·l púm káulat                                      
                                                                                    
               samti     ití  kuš,mel,me·l   pum  ka-ul-at                          
                                                                                    
               Saturday  night black.person,PL, dance make-3PLS-PRET                
                                                                                    
               ‘On Saturday night, the black people held a dance.’ (1932:20:141)    
                                                                                    
          Irregular pluralization. There are only four nouns in Atakapa that form plurals in this way, kíš
                                                                                    
          ‘woman’, pl. kéš 9, kíš iškalít ‘girl,’ pl. kešéš, cíš ‘infant,’ pl. šé·š, and katpák ‘trout,’ pl. katpá.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          These plural nouns requires a plural adjective and a plural verb.         
                                                                                    
               [keˊc caksokeˊc yoˊxt wi caˊk’hinai]                                 
                                                                                    
          358) kéš šakšoké·šyóht wí šakhinày                                        
                                                                                    
               keš       šak-šoke·š-yoht     wi   šak-hi-nay                        
                                                                                    
               women     3PLSTATS-sick-lie(pl) I  3PLO-1STATS-think                 
                                                                                    
               ‘I think many women are lying sick.’ (1932:65:2)                     
                                                                                    
           There is a single noun which forms its plural with an irregular prefix: wáš ‘leaf,’ plural
                                                                                    
          téwaš. This plural noun also requires a plural verb.                      
                                                                                    
               {téwash wilótit}                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          359) téwaš wilótit                                                        
                                                                                    
               té-waš    ø-wiló-tit                                                 
                                                                                    
               PL-leaf   3STATS-fall(pl)-PROG(PL)                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘The leaves are falling.’ (Gatschet, 1885a:223)                      
                                                                                    
          Nouns plural in form but singular in meaning. There are a handful of Atakapa nouns that
                                                                                    
          appear plural in form, using adjectival pluralization, the meanings of which are singular.
                                                                                    
               noktewmélme·l  ‘goose’   mélme·l   ‘black (pl)’                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         164                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               tépukkúckuc    ‘plum’    kúckuc    ‘red (pl)’                        
                                                                                    
               yáwlákla·k     ‘drum fish’ láklá·k ‘hard (pl)’                       
                                                                                    
          All three of these nouns were originally descriptive phrases: noktéw mélme·l ‘its shoulders are
                                                                                    
          black;’ tépuk kúckuc ‘they are red peaches,’ and yáw á·l lákla·k ‘hard-fleshed fish,’ in the latter
                                                                                    
          case, pluralization of the adjective occurred because á·l ‘flesh’ is a mass noun. No plural forms
                                                                                    
          of these nouns have been noted.                                           
                                                                                    
          Noun possession. Possession is marked by placing the possessor noun or pronoun before the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          possessed noun.                                                           
                                                                                    
               [Iˊcak kaˊw aˊñ laˊwiulat]                                           
                                                                                    
          360) išà·k káw áŋ láwiulat                                                
                                                                                    
               iša·k     kaw  aŋ   law-i-ul-at.                                     
                                                                                    
               person    dead house burn-CAUS-3PLS-PRET                             
                                                                                    
               ‘They burned the dead person’s house. (1932:19:138)                  
                                                                                    
          If the possessor is a singular pronoun, the pronoun is unaccented.        
                                                                                    
               [ha icāˊt ha uˊc mōn naˊ-ucĕm]                                       
                                                                                    
          361) ha išá·t ha úš mo·n náwšim                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ha   iša·t ha  uš   mo·n ø-naw-šim                                   
                                                                                    
               his  head his  body all  3STATS-hair-NOTHING.BUT                     
                                                                                    
               ‘His head and his whole body were nothing but hair.’ (1932: 11:33-34)
                                                                                    
               {shók na komhópshkin nkéa? laklā́ksh nīt}                            
                                                                                    
          362) šók na komhópškin n̥ké á? laklá·kš ní·t                              
                                                                                    
               šok       na   komhopš-kin n̥-ke        a    lakla·kš  ni·t          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               something your pocket-LOC 2SSTATS-have  Q    dollar    five          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         165                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘What do you have in your pocket? Five dollars.’ (Gatschet 1885b:79) 
                                                                                    
               [wi kulcaˊ Cuˊkuhui yuk’hiˊti cox̥ koˊyat]                           
                                                                                    
          363) wi kulšá šúkuhuy yukhíti šokóyat                                     
                                                                                    
               wi   kulša     šukuhuy   yukhiti   ø-šokoy-at                        
                                                                                    
               my   grandfather PN      Indian    3STATS-be.chief-PRET              
                                                                                    
               ‘My grandfather, Šukuhuy, was an Indian chief.’ (1932:16:93)         
                                                                                    
          The use of a resumptive pronoun for third person possession is very common, even though the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          apposition construction in example 360 seems perfectly adequate.          
                                                                                    
               [Caktaˊlko Yuk’hiˊti icaˊk kaˊ-u haˊtalkoˊat hinaˊk cakioˊñculĕt]    
                                                                                    
          364) šaktálko yukhíti išá·k káw ha tàl kóat hinák šakyóŋšulat             
                                                                                    
               šak-tal-ko     yukhiti   iša·k kaw ha   tal  ø-ko-at                 
                                                                                    
               PL-skin-wanter Indian    person dead his skin 3STATS-want-PRET       
                                                                                    
               hinak     šak-yoŋš-ul-at                                             
                                                                                    
               be.like   3PLO-call-3PLO-PRET                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘The Skin-desirer wanted the skin of a dead Indian; for this reason they named it so.’
                                                                                    
               (1932:11:32)                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [icak heˊ-u hakit eˊñip cakwaˊ-uco]                                  
                                                                                    
          365) iša·k héw hakit é·ŋip šakwáhušo                                      
                                                                                    
               iša·k     hew  hakit e·ŋ-ip   šak-wahuš-o                            
                                                                                    
               person    many their name-INESS 3PLO-call-1SS                        
                                                                                    
               ‘I call many people by their names.’ (1932:31:1)                     
                                                                                    
          The possessive phrase forms a semantic unit and can be the subject or the object of a verb.
                                                                                    
               [wīc wi itēˊt iyaniaˊn haˊxcat]                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         166                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          366) wí·š wi ité·t hiyanyánháhšat                                         
                                                                                    
               wi-iš wi  ite·t hi-yanyan-hahš-at                                    
                                                                                    
               I-FOC my  father 1SSTATS-fear-NEG-PRET                               
                                                                                    
               ‘I did not fear my father.’ (1932:16:103)                            
                                                                                    
          The possessor noun must be in the absolutive state and not have the focus marker -iš. Note the
                                                                                    
          following example, where the pronoun in the focus form is the subject of the verb ‘not to have,’
                                                                                    
          and is not the possessor of the noun ‘husband.’                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [hāc ipaˊ hāˊxcĕt (h)iuˊxts atkaˊki]                                 
                                                                                    
          367) há·š hipá háhšat hiúhc atkáki                                        
                                                                                    
               ha-iš     hipa      ø-hahš-at           hi-uhc     atkaki            
                                                                                    
               she-FOC   husband   3STATS-not.have-PRET 1SSTATS-know since          
                                                                                    
               ‘She did not have a husband from the time I knew her.’ (Not *her husband did
                                                                                    
               not exist…) (1932:14:73-74)                                          
                                                                                    
          A noun phrase can act as the possessor of another noun.                   
                                                                                    
               [kéˊc ‘n cakióˊl téc mōñ cakmañmáˊñĕt]                               
                                                                                    
          368) kéšn̥ šakyól té·š mo·n šakmaŋmáŋat                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               keš=n̥         šakyol    te·š mo·n šak-maŋ,maŋ-at                    
                                                                                    
               woman(pl)=and  man       hair all  3PLSTATS-REDUP, be.long-PRET      
                                                                                    
               ‘Women’s and men’s hair was all long.’ (1932:10:23)                  
                                                                                    
          In this example the third-person plural stative prefix acts as a marker of indirect object.
                                                                                    
          The noun té·š is a mass noun and requires plural verb agreement, so the prefix refers back to the
                                                                                    
          nouns acting as possessors. The verb can be translated literally as ‘it was long to/for them.’
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         167                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            Complex possessive phrases also occur. In the following example the word hakít ‘they’ is the
                                                                                    
          possessor of nómš, ‘child’ which is the possessor of the word išá·t ‘head.’
                                                                                    
               {Tsaxtá shakīt nómsh ishát shakpalpálishat}                          
                                                                                    
          369) cahtá·š hakít nómš išá·t šakpalpálišat                               
                                                                                    
               cahta-iš  hakit nomš     iša·t     šak-,pal,pal-iš-ø-at              
                                                                                    
               Choctaw-FOC their child  head      3PLO-,REDUP,be.flat-CAUS-3SS-PRET 
                                                                                    
               ‘As for the Choctaw, they flattened the various heads of their children.’ (Gatschet,
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               1885b:147)                                                           
                                                                                    
          Pronouns. Atakapa pronouns distinguish three persons and two numbers. They occur in
                                                                                    
          absolutive, ergative (marked by the suffix -ik)10, and focus forms (marked by the suffix -iš),
                                                                                    
          although not all ergative forms are attested, and only two of the ergative and focused forms is
                                                                                    
          found in the corpus.                                                      
                                                                                    
                              Absolutive Ergative Focus     Ergative/Focus          
                                                                                    
          1st person singular wí        wí·k      wíiš / wí·š (lacking)             
                                                                                    
          2nd person singular ná        ná·k      náiš / ná·š ná·kš                 
                                                                                    
          3rd person singular há        há·k      haiš / há·š (lacking)             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          1st person plural   yukít     yukitik   yukítiš / yukíts (lacking)        
                                                                                    
          2nd person plural   nakít     (lacking) nakitiš     (lacking)             
                                                                                    
          3rd person plural   hakít     (lacking) hakitiš / hakíts (lacking)        
                                                                                    
          Pronouns are preposed to nouns to mark possession, preposed to verbs to mark subject. Subject
                                                                                    
          pronouns are very frequent in the elicited material in the dictionary, but are much less frequent in
                                                                                    
          the texts, where they always seem to have a certain emphasis.             
                                                                                    
               [wīc wi itēˊt iyaniaˊn haˊxcat]                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         168                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          370) wí·š wi ité·t hiyanyánháhšat                                         
                                                                                    
               wi-iš wi  ite·t hi-yanyan-hahš-at                                    
                                                                                    
               I-FOC my  father 1SSTATS-fear-NEG-PRET                               
                                                                                    
               ‘I did not fear my father.’ (1932:16:103)                            
                                                                                    
               [yac nak tuˊtayhaˊxc nkaˊkit]                                        
                                                                                    
          371) yá·š ná·k tútayháhš n̥ kákit.                                        
                                                                                    
               ya-iš     na-ik          tutayhahš n̥-ka-kit                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               that-FOC  you-ERG.AGNT   in.vain   2SSTATS-do-PROG                   
                                                                                    
               ‘You are doing that in vain.’ (1932:35:1)                            
                                                                                    
               [coˊk (h)iwineˊat nāˊkc naˊxkan waˊncĕn]                             
                                                                                    
          372) šók hiwinéat ná·kš náhka n̥ wáncn̥                                   
                                                                                    
               šók       hi-wine-at     na-ik-š        nahka                        
                                                                                    
               something 1SSTATS-find-PRET you-ERG.AGNT-FOC must.not                
                                                                                    
               n̥-wanc-n̥                                                           
                                                                                    
               2SSTATS-tell-IF                                                      
                                                                                    
               ‘I found something; you must say nothing to anyone.’ (1932:142:2)    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               {kéushuχkinto náksh ke-ushiúlkinto}                                  
                                                                                    
          373) kewƛúkškinto ná·kš kewyúlškinto                                      
                                                                                    
               kéw-ƛukš-ki-nt-o·             ná-ik-iš                               
                                                                                    
               SIT-smoke.tobacco-FC-CONTIN-PHR:TERM you(sg)-ERG.AGNT-FOC            
                                                                                    
               kew-yulš-ki-nt-o·                                                    
                                                                                    
               SIT-write-FC-CONTIN-PHR.TERM                                         
                                                                                    
               ‘I will sit and smoke. You will sit and write.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:107)
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         169                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [wi kulcaˊ kaˊ-ukin yaˊ hāˊc yilkeˊ tuˊl ma inoˊ-i tsīˊpcat]         
                                                                                    
          374) wi kulšá káwkinya ha·š yílke túl maynóy cípšat                       
                                                                                    
               wi   kulša     ø-kaw-kin=ya        ha-iš     yilke     tul           
                                                                                    
               my   grandfather 3STATS-die-WHEN=and she-FOC marry     lake          
                                                                                    
               maynoy    cipš-ø-at                                                  
                                                                                    
               other.side move-3SS-PRET                                             
                                                                                    
               ‘When my grandfather died, then she married and moved to the other side of the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               lake.’ (1932:16:99-100)                                              
                                                                                    
               [Yukiˊts icatsiˊckicat yukiˊt okēt huˊne]                            
                                                                                    
          375) yukíts iššaccíškišat yukít oké·t húne.                               
                                                                                    
               yukit-š   iš-hat-ciškiš-at         yukit oke·t hu-ne.                
                                                                                    
               we-FOC    1PLSTATS-REFLEX-be:glad-PRET our mother see-GER            
                                                                                    
               ‘We were glad to see our mother.’ (1932:17:109)                      
                                                                                    
               [yukiˊt ikinhuˊtsĕl]                                                 
                                                                                    
          376) yukítik n̥ húcel                                                     
                                                                                    
               yukit-ik  n̥-hu-cel                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               we-ERG.AGNT 2SO-see-1PLS                                             
                                                                                    
               ‘We see you.’ (1932:158:1)                                           
                                                                                    
               {nakit nak yá-insh}                                                  
                                                                                    
          377) nakít nakyáhinš                                                      
                                                                                    
               nakit     nak-yah-inš                                                
                                                                                    
               you(pl)   2PLSTATS-eat-HABIT                                         
                                                                                    
               ‘You all habitually eat it.’ (Gatschet, 1885c: [7])                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         170                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               {Yokón shakyókat hakīˊt oˊt}                                         
                                                                                    
          378) yokón šakyókat hakítot                                               
                                                                                    
               yokon     šak-yok-ø-at        hakit-ot                               
                                                                                    
               song      3PLO-sing-3SS-PRET  they-DIR                               
                                                                                    
               ‘She sang songs to them.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:162-63)                   
                                                                                    
          Deictics. There are two deictics, á ‘this; these,’ and yá ‘that; those;’ a third deictic has but a
                                                                                    
          single occurrence: ináha ‘that; those far off.’ The deictics can also serve as pronouns, in which
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          case they mean ‘this person; this thing,’ and ‘that person; that thing.’ In their use as deictics,
                                                                                    
          they always precede the noun they modify.                                 
                                                                                    
               [Kic Tōt haˊ nīl Yoyoˊt haˊ ickiciˊl haˊhu īt kaˊwat aˊ nuˊnkin]     
                                                                                    
          379) kištó·t ha níl yoyót ha iškišíl háhuwi·t káwat á núŋkin              
                                                                                    
               kišto·t ha nil      yoyot ha  iškišil   hahuwi·t                     
                                                                                    
               PN     her grandchild PN her  daughter  previously                   
                                                                                    
               ø-kaw-at       a    nuŋ-kin                                          
                                                                                    
               3STATS-die-PRET this village-LOC                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘Kišto·t, her grandchild, Yoyot’s daughter, had died previously in this town.’
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               (1932:15:90-91)                                                      
                                                                                    
               [Yukiˊt nuˊnkin puˊm ichāˊxc a itiyiˊlc]                             
                                                                                    
          380) yukít núŋkin púm išháhš á itiyílš                                    
                                                                                    
               yukit nuŋ-kin  pum       iš-hahš        a    itiyilš                 
                                                                                    
               our  village-LOC dance   1PLSTATS-not.have this month                
                                                                                    
               ‘We are not having a dance in our village this month.’ (1932:13:53)  
                                                                                    
               [ac mel uˊc]                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         171                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          381) á·š me·lúš                                                           
                                                                                    
               a-iš      ø-me·l-uš                                                  
                                                                                    
               this-FOC  3STATS-be.black-be.true                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘This is true black.’ (1932:80:1)                                    
                                                                                    
               {á ókit}                                                             
                                                                                    
          382) á ókkit                                                              
                                                                                    
               a         ø-ok-kit                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               this.person 3STATS-come-PROG(SG)                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘This person is coming.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:57)                        
                                                                                    
               [Yaˊ icaˊk kaˊ-u yuk’hiˊti cox̥ koˊ-in haˊ tsanuˊk nec ipaˊx̥ c icā́t atyĕˊnē
                                                                                    
          383) yá išá·k káw yukhíti šokóyen ha canúk nešipáhš iša·thatyínšne        
                                                                                    
               laklaˊkc k’opik kaˊ hoktiwēˊ imōˊculat]                              
                                                                                    
               laklákškopik ká hoktiwé·himó·šulat                                   
                                                                                    
               ya   iša·k     kaw  yukhiti   ø-šokoy-en     ha   canuk              
                                                                                    
               nešipahš                                                             
                                                                                    
               that person    dead Indian    3STATS-be.chief-IF his horse saddle    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               iša·t-hat-yinš-ne   laklakš-kop-ik           ka                      
                                                                                    
               head-REFLEX-wrap-GER precious.metal-white-ERG.INSTR make             
                                                                                    
               hok-tiwe·-himo·š-ul-at                                               
                                                                                    
               RECIP-be.together-bury-3PLS-PRET                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘If that dead person were an Indian chief, they buried him together with his horse,
                                                                                    
               saddle, and crown made of silver.’ (1932:19:131-33)                  
                                                                                    
               [yaˊ ka-ucnăˊ paˊl’at]                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         172                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          384) yá káwšne pałat                                                      
                                                                                    
               ya   kawšne    paƛ-ø-at                                              
                                                                                    
               that comb      be.broken-3SS-PRET                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘That comb is broken.’ (1932:102:2)                                  
                                                                                    
               [yaˊc kiwiˊlcul aˊ]                                                  
                                                                                    
          385) yá·š kiwílšul á                                                      
                                                                                    
               ya-iš     kiwilš-ul           a                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               that-FOC  be.white.person-3PLS Q                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘Are those white people?’ (1932:67:2)                                
                                                                                    
               [inaˊha noˊmc]                                                       
                                                                                    
          386) ináha nómš                                                           
                                                                                    
               inaha     nomš                                                       
                                                                                    
               that(far) child                                                      
                                                                                    
               ‘that child far off’ (1932:93:1)                                     
                                                                                    
          The deictics are related to the nouns ap ‘here,’ awp ‘ right here,’ and yap / yaŋ ‘there,’ The
                                                                                    
          adverb ináha ‘sort of; somewhat,” is homophonous with, and may be identical to the deictic
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ináha.                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Postpositions. Postpositions are relational nouns that indicate the location of the nouns they
                                                                                    
          modify. Postpositions can take nominal cases, and like other nouns can be verbalized freely. As
                                                                                    
          their name indicates, postpositions follow the nouns they modify.         
                                                                                    
          The following is a list of some of them:                                  
                                                                                    
               cikátip   ‘between’                                                  
                                                                                    
               hiki ino  ‘on the west side of’                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         173                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               huy       ‘under’                                                    
                                                                                    
               inahi     ‘beyond’                                                   
                                                                                    
               iti       ‘in front of’                                              
                                                                                    
               maynoy    ‘on the other side of’                                     
                                                                                    
               o         ‘at the edge of; near’                                     
                                                                                    
               oc        ‘right on’                                                 
                                                                                    
               oci       ‘over’                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ó·l       ‘near’                                                     
                                                                                    
               tólpot inó ‘on the east side of’                                     
                                                                                    
          Note that cikátip ‘between’ is placed after the second noun.              
                                                                                    
               [wi aˊñ wañnē taˊ-i tsikaˊdep tāt(o)]                                
                                                                                    
          387) wi áŋ wáŋne táy cikátip tá·to                                        
                                                                                    
               wi   aŋ        waŋne     tay  cikatip   ta·t-ø-o·                    
                                                                                    
               my   house     road      river between  stand-3SS-PHR.TERM           
                                                                                    
               ‘My house stands between the road and the river.’ (1932:28:2)        
                                                                                    
               [Inkiliˊc taˊ-i oˊts nûˊn kēˊt’ntat Tuˊl Teˊ-u oˊtse]                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          388) inkilíš táy óc núŋké·tn̥ tat túl téw óci                             
                                                                                    
               inkiliš   tay  oc        nuŋ-ke·t-n̥t-at                             
                                                                                    
               English   river right.on village-dwell-CONTIN-PRET                   
                                                                                    
               tul  tew       oci                                                   
                                                                                    
               lake upstream  over                                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘He used to live in a village right on English Bayou, over Lake Charles (1932:16:94)
                                                                                    
               [yukiˊti nuˊnkin kēˊt’ntat Yuk’hiˊti Tuˊl toˊlpot inoˊ]              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         174                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          389) yukhíti núŋkin ké·tn̥tat yukhíti túl tólpot inó                      
                                                                                    
               yukhiti nuŋ-kin ke·t-n̥t-at   yukhiti   tul  tolpot ino              
                                                                                    
               Indian village-LOC dwell-CONTIN-PRET Indian lake east side           
                                                                                    
               ‘She used to live in an Indian village on the east side of Lake Prien (Indian Lake).’
                                                                                    
               (1932:14:71)                                                         
                                                                                    
               [Icāˊt atyĕˊnē laklaˊkc koˊpik kaˊ wine-ulat Yuk’hiˊti Tuˊl hikiˊ inoˊ]
                                                                                    
          390) iša·thatyíncne laklákškópik ká winéulat yukhíti túl hikí inó         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               iša·thatyincne laklakškop-ik ka wine-ul-at   yukhiti                 
                                                                                    
               crown     silver-ERG.INSTR make find-3PLS-PRET Indian                
                                                                                    
               tul  hiki ino                                                        
                                                                                    
               lake west side                                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘They found a crown made of silver on the west side of Lake Prien (Indian Lake).’
                                                                                    
               (1932:19:133-35)                                                     
                                                                                    
               [tuˊl ma inoˊ-i tsīˊpcat]                                            
                                                                                    
          391) túl maynóy cípšat                                                    
                                                                                    
               tul  maynoy         cipš-ø-at                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               lake other.side.of  move-3SS-PRET                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘She moved to the other side of the lake.’ (1932:16:100)             
                                                                                    
               [wāˊñne oˊ]                                                          
                                                                                    
          392) wáŋne ó                                                              
                                                                                    
               waŋne o                                                              
                                                                                    
               road      at.the.edge.of                                             
                                                                                    
               ‘alongside the road’ (1932:142:1)                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         175                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Numerals. There are three kinds of numerals in Atakapa, cardinal, adverbial, and distributive.11
                                                                                    
          Numerals are nouns, and can take case suffixes; the inessive case suffix -ip derives the adverbial
                                                                                    
          numerals from the cardinal numerals. In addition to the regular numerals, the quantifiers héw
                                                                                    
          ‘many’ and hatnáh ‘so many’ pattern as numerals.                          
                                                                                    
          Cardinal                      Adverbial                                   
                                                                                    
          héw            many           héwip               many times              
                                                                                    
          hatnáh         so many        hatnáhip            how many times?         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          tanúk          one            tanúkip             once                    
                                                                                    
          cí·k           two            cí·kip              twice                   
                                                                                    
          lá·t           three          lá·tip              thrice                  
                                                                                    
          himatól        four           himatólip           four times              
                                                                                    
          ní·t           five           ní·tip              five times              
                                                                                    
          laccí·k        six            laccí·kip           six times               
                                                                                    
          páhw           seven          páhwip              seven times             
                                                                                    
          himatólcí·k    eight          himatólcí·kip       eight times             
                                                                                    
          wóšišólhá·n    nine           wóšišólhá·nip       nine times              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          wošpé          ten            wošpéip             ten times               
                                                                                    
          wospé hál tanúk eleven        wospéip hál tanúkip eleven times            
                                                                                    
          wospé hál cí·k twelve         wospéip hál cí·kip  twelve times            
                                                                                    
          wošpécí·k      twenty         wošpécí·kip         twenty times            
                                                                                    
          wošpéní·t      fifty          wošpéní·tip         fifty times             
                                                                                    
          hiyén pón      hundred        hiyén pónip         a hundred times         
                                                                                    
          hiyén pón cakóp thousand      hiyén pón cakópip   a thousand times        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         176                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [yiˊl lāt himatoˊl-u tatiˊhin-tāt]                                   
                                                                                    
          393) yil la·t himatólot tà·ttihin̥tat                                     
                                                                                    
               yil  la·t himatol-ot ta·t-tihi-n̥t-at                                
                                                                                    
               day  three four-DIR stand(sg)-CONTIN-PRET                            
                                                                                    
               ‘He kept on living for three to four days.’ (1932:10:18-19)          
                                                                                    
               [Icyutyuˊts ya tanuˊkip co haˊ icpaˊts haˊhat]                       
                                                                                    
          394) išyucyucya tanúkip šoháh išpácháhat                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               iš-,yuc,yuc=ya      tanúk-ip  šo-háh    iš-pác-ø-háh-at              
                                                                                    
               1PLO-,REDUP,raise=and one-INESS ever-NEG 1PLO-whip-3SS-NEG-PRET      
                                                                                    
               ‘He raised us and never whipped us even once.’ (1932:16:102-03)      
                                                                                    
               [tsoˊ-ots heˊwip hilc]                                               
                                                                                    
          395) cohòc héwip hílš                                                     
                                                                                    
               cohoc hew-ip   hilš-ø                                                
                                                                                    
               corn many-INESS sift-3SS                                             
                                                                                    
               ‘He sifts the corn many times.’ (1932:39:2)                          
                                                                                    
          Only the numbers one through five and seven are monomorphemic. Six, laccí·k is from la·t cí·k
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ‘two threes,’ eight, himatólcí·k is from himatól cí·k ‘two fours,’ and nine, wóšišólhá·n is from
                                                                                    
          wóšišó·l há·n ‘the little finger is lacking.’                             
                                                                                    
            The distributive numerals are derived with the suffix -šim, which makes them into verbs.
                                                                                    
          The following list is exhaustive; there are no examples of their use in sentences.
                                                                                    
          Distributive                                                              
                                                                                    
          tanúkšim       one apiece                                                 
                                                                                    
          cí·kšim        two apiece                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         177                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          lá·tsim        three apiece                                               
                                                                                    
          himatólšim     four apiece                                                
                                                                                    
          ní·tsim        five apiece                                                
                                                                                    
          laccí·ksim     six apiece                                                 
                                                                                    
          páhwsim        seven apiece                                               
                                                                                    
          wošpéšim       ten apiece                                                 
                                                                                    
          Kišyuc and Tottokš explicitly stated that Atakapa lacks ordinal numerals (first, second, etc.).12
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          The closest Atakapa comes to placing nouns in order is using the words í·t ‘face; first’ kimátip
                                                                                    
          ‘in the middle,’ and hál ‘second; back; last.’                            
                                                                                    
               [woˊc īt]                                                            
                                                                                    
          396) wóš í·t                                                              
                                                                                    
               woš       i·t                                                        
                                                                                    
               hand/finger face                                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘first finger (index finger)’ (1932:151:1)                           
                                                                                    
               [wi hipaˊ haˊl]                                                      
                                                                                    
          397) wi hipá hál                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               wi   hipa      hal                                                   
                                                                                    
               my   husband   back                                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘my second husband; my last husband.’ (1932:35:2)                    
                                                                                    
          There is one additional numeral, šukí·ŋ ‘one-half.’ No adverbial or distributive form is attested.
                                                                                    
               [kuiyatkoˊl lāt haˊl cukīˊñ]                                         
                                                                                    
          398) kuyyatkól lá·t hál šukí·ŋ                                            
                                                                                    
               kuyyatkol la·t hal  šuki·ŋ                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         178                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               sausage   three more half                                            
                                                                                    
               ‘three-and-a-half sausages.’ (1932:116:2)                            
                                                                                    
               {hatnáχkan mḗtsá? hikát nī́t yahaˊl cokī́ng, wí(sh)}                
                                                                                    
          399) hatnáhka n̥méc á? hiká·t ní·tya hál šukí·ŋ, wí·š                     
                                                                                    
               hatnah-ka n̥-mec    a    hika·t ni·t=ya hal  šuki·ŋ    wi-iš         
                                                                                    
               so.much-ADV 2STATS-be.tall Q foot be.five=and more be.half I-FOC     
                                                                                    
               ‘How tall are you? As for me, I am five and a half feet.’ (Gatschet 1885b:83)
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Noun formation. There are two primary methods of noun formation, derivation and
                                                                                    
          compounding. Nouns are derived from verbs by the suffixes -ne and -nán. Words formed by
                                                                                    
          means of the gerund suffix -ne retain the accent of the verbal root; those formed with -nán
                                                                                    
          usually shift the accent to the suffix. Originally, it seems that nouns derived with -ne focused on
                                                                                    
          the result of the action, for example í·t hathúne ‘mirror,’ from í·t hat-hú ‘to see one’s face.’ The
                                                                                    
          suffix -nán, on the other hand focused on a noun that does the action, for example kocnán
                                                                                    
          ‘knife,’ from kóc ‘to cut,’ literally ‘cutter,’ and formed agentive nouns. However, the suffix -nán
                                                                                    
          is now restricted to a very few words, and often have an alternative form in -ne, and there are
                                                                                    
          quite a few agentive nouns formed with the suffix -ne. Many derived nouns are nominalizations
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          of verb phrases, not simply root verbs.                                   
                                                                                    
          Nominalization of verb root:                                              
                                                                                    
          himó·šne       ‘grave’        himó·š         ‘he/she buries him’          
                                                                                    
          wáŋne          ‘road’         wáŋ            ‘he/she goes about’          
                                                                                    
          káwšne         ‘comb’         káwš           ‘he/she combs it’            
                                                                                    
          kimíŋne        ‘windpipe’     kimíŋ          ‘he/she breathes’            
                                                                                    
          neˑšilšnán     ‘broom’        neˑšílš        ‘he/she sweeps’              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         179                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          nakšnán        ‘violin’       nákš           ‘he/she plays music’         
                                                                                    
          Nominalization of a verb phrase                                           
                                                                                    
          iša·kšakkóŋne  ‘sheriff’      išá·k šakkóŋ   ‘he seizes people’           
                                                                                    
          katnáw hatlášne ‘razor’       katnáw hatláš  ‘he shaves his beard’        
                                                                                    
          kapí líline    ‘coffee grinder’ kapí líli    ‘he/she grinds coffee’       
                                                                                    
          ne·šilšnán     ‘broom’        né· šílš       ‘he/she sweeps the ground’   
                                                                                    
          šokšilnán      ‘sewing machine’ šokšíl       ‘he/she sews’                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          A nominalized verb can in turn form part of a further nominalization      
                                                                                    
          kucnán kininán ‘whetstone’    kucnán kíni    ‘he/she sharpens knives      
                                                                                    
          Agentive nouns are productively formed with the suffix -ne, as above. However, a more archaic
                                                                                    
          way of forming agentive nouns was to convert the plain verb root into a noun.
                                                                                    
          wakpúh         ‘to jump about; hail’ wakpùh  ‘grasshopper’                
                                                                                    
          šokyáh         ‘to eat’       šokyáh         ‘eater’                      
                                                                                    
          šaktál kóh     ‘he wants skins’ šaktalkóh    ‘the Skin-Desirer’           
                                                                                    
          Compounding is the other major way to form new nouns in Atakapa. The components can be
                                                                                    
          two (or more) nouns, or a noun and an adjective, or nouns and verb roots. 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          tík  ‘arrow’   išá·t     ‘head’    tikišá·t  ‘arrowhead’                  
                                                                                    
          tút  ‘cypress’ áy        ‘swamp’   tutáy     ‘cypress swamp’              
                                                                                    
          pé·m ‘gun’     mók       ‘short’   pe·mmók   ‘pistol’                     
                                                                                    
          míŋ  ‘bee’     pá        ‘nest’    míŋpá     ‘beehive’                    
                                                                                    
          néš ‘tree’ kíŋš ‘to saw’ támš ‘to split’ áŋ ‘house’ neškiŋštámšáŋ ‘sawmill’
                                                                                    
          A noun in the directional case can be the first member of a compound noun.
                                                                                    
          óc-ot ‘abovewards’ tá·t  ‘to stand’ ocottá·t ‘God’                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         180                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ók-ot ‘into cloth’ káwš  ‘to put in’ okotkáwš ‘shirt’                     
                                                                                    
          Occasionally the compound word has a meaning unrelated to the individual elements which
                                                                                    
          compose it.                                                               
                                                                                    
          šiwát ‘alligator’ te· ‘leaves’ néš ‘tree’ šiwatte· néš ‘prickly ash’      
                                                                                    
          hiláŋ ‘vulture’ teˑ ‘leaves’ néš ‘tree’ hiláŋteˑ néš ‘magnolia’           
                                                                                    
          hiláŋ ‘vulture’ wo·l ‘eye’              hilaŋwo·l ‘muscadine’             
                                                                                    
          hiláŋ ‘vulture’ išo·l ‘young’ téy ‘vine’ hilaŋišó·l téy ‘summer grapes’   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          There are a handful of words borrowed from other languages, mostly from French:
                                                                                    
          kapí      ‘coffee’       French    café                                   
                                                                                    
          skalé     ‘12½ cents’    French    escalin cf. Koasati skalí              
                                                                                    
          líla      ‘chinaberry’   French    lilas (des Antilles)                   
                                                                                    
          kúmpo     ‘okra’         French    gumbo < Mbundu ngombo                  
                                                                                    
          pákan     ‘pecan’        French    pacane                                 
                                                                                    
          ši·l      ‘sail of a ship’ English sail                                   
                                                                                    
          ánanuy    ‘bullfrog’     Natchez   ʔananaY c.f. Koasati hanonó            
                                                                                    
          kamcíš    ‘dragonfly’    Chitimacha kumčˀit                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          cáyon     ‘Mexico’       Caddo     hispayun < Spanish Español             
                                                                                    
          áleman    ‘German’       French    Allemand                               
                                                                                    
          inkilíš   ‘American’     English   English                                
                                                                                    
          cahtá     ‘Choctaw’      Choctaw   čahta                                  
                                                                                    
          alpamú    ‘Alabama’      Alabama   alba:mo                                
                                                                                    
          nékitoš   ‘Natchitoches’ Caddo     na šitˀuš cf. Eng /ˈnækədıš/           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         181                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          There are certainly borrowings from other American Indian languages, but as the neighboring
                                                                                    
          languages are so poorly known it is difficult to determine what they might be. There is clear
                                                                                    
          Chitimacha influence on Hiyékiti; for example, Hiyékiti heysiŋ ‘ten’ is borrowed from
                                                                                    
          Chitimacha heyčˀi ‘ten,’ c.f. Yukhíti wošpé ‘ten.’ There are at least two loan translations from
                                                                                    
          another Indian language, kakók tím ‘garden,’ lit. ‘picket fence,’ Koasati holihtá caká:wa
                                                                                    
          ‘garden,’ lit. ‘picket fence,’ and wólhopšiškám ‘sifting basket with wide openings,’ wól-hopš-
                                                                                    
          iškám ‘eye-hole-big’ Koasati tiłcobá ‘sifting basket with wide holes,’ (it)tił(í)-cobá ‘eye-big.’13
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Notes                                                                     
                                                                                    
          1. This example, from Kišyuc, so struck Gatschet that he made the comment “kushmélik is here
                                                                                    
          subject” (1885b:66). He, thinking that word order was primary, elicited the phase kušmé·l nimá
                                                                                    
          from Tottokš, seemingly to see if the noun would be the subject, and her translation was ‘he
                                                                                    
          killed the black person.’ This is as close as Gatschet came to realizing the existence of the
                                                                                    
          ergative case.                                                            
                                                                                    
          2. This example almost looks like the transitive sentence, ‘The steam burned me,’ except that
                                                                                    
          the intransitive verb láw ‘to burn’ is used, not the transitive verb láwi ‘to burn something.’
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          3. This is the Atakapa pronunciation of the English ‘Choctaw.’ Elsewhere, the Atakapa
                                                                                    
          pronunciation of the name is given as cahtá.                              
                                                                                    
          4. A further example may be šak-tal ‘skins’ in the name of the monster šaktalkoh ‘the Skin-
                                                                                    
          Desirer.’                                                                 
                                                                                    
          5. The element kuš- is synchronically unanalyzable. It may be related to the word úš, ‘body.’
                                                                                    
          6. The element kiš ‘woman’ uses its own plural keš in the plural form.    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         182                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          7. This word is probably a calque on English. It is never used in the texts or example sentences,
                                                                                    
          where yukhíti is universally used in the meaning ‘Indian,’ and is glossed by the Louisiana French
                                                                                    
          word sauvage.                                                             
                                                                                    
          8. This word was said to be archaic, and reflects the idea that the pale skin color of Europeans
                                                                                    
          looked like the skin color of corpses; a comment by Kišyuc (1885b:91) indicates that the
                                                                                    
          Atakapa first thought that white people were dead people who had come back to life.
                                                                                    
               On the other hand, Kisyuc might have been trying to spare Gatschet’s feelings, for over
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          20 years later, the word occurs in one of the only two sentences Swanton obtained from Teet
                                                                                    
          Verdine:                                                                  
                                                                                    
               {kushmếl’n shakó ṓkêt}                                             
                                                                                    
          8a)  kušmé·ln̥ šakkáw ókkit                                               
                                                                                    
               kušmé·l=n̥     šakkáw    ók-kit                                      
                                                                                    
               black.person=and white.person come-PROG(SG)                          
                                                                                    
               ‘A black person and a white person are coming.’ (Swanton, 1907:189)  
                                                                                    
          9. It may be of interest to note that the word for woman in the neighboring language Chitimacha,
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kiča, has an irregular plural kič.                                        
                                                                                    
          10. Ergative forms of the pronouns were frequently not written by Gatschet, as he seems to have
                                                                                    
          assumed that pronouns were indeclinable. At times, when he recorded an ergative case form, he
                                                                                    
          went back and edited it out, as in this example (1885b:71) {wi kshok mísho} wí·k šakmíšo, ‘I
                                                                                    
          give it to them,’ where he went back and scratched out the k with red ink. Gatschet also edited
                                                                                    
          out other ergative forms, for example (1885b:69) he wrote {shíwonikna tsúmĕt na kámshĕt}
                                                                                    
          šiwònik nakcúmat nakkámšat ‘The cat pinched you all and scratched you all,’ and he went back
                                                                                    
          and edited it until he had {shíwon nakshakkámšat} šiwòn nakšakkámšat, and glossed it ‘The cat
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         183                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          scratched ye,’ even though if read as a grammatical sentence it means, ‘You all scratched the
                                                                                    
          cats.’                                                                    
                                                                                    
          11. Gatschet (and Swanton in his turn) mistakenly thought that there was a set of multiplicative
                                                                                    
          numerals in -ip hipónso, eg. ‘seven-fold’ {pa’hwip hipónso} (1885a:101) páhwip hipónso.
                                                                                    
          However this is simply the literal translation of ‘I fold it seven times’ hipóns-o simply meaning
                                                                                    
          ‘I fold it.’                                                              
                                                                                    
          12. On page 36 of his field notes (1885b), the red ink indicating Tottokš as the source, Gatschet
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          wrote: “hál tsík [‘second’] hal lāt [‘third’] etc. could be used; not real words.”
                                                                                    
          13. Gatschet’s notes say that this kind of basket came from Hickory Flat, which was the name of
                                                                                    
          the area between the Calcasieu River and Bayou Blue, which flows into the Mermentau River;
                                                                                    
          the 1880 US Census locates the Koasati Indians at Hickory Flat.           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         184                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          4. SYNTAX                                                                 
                                                                                    
          Ergativity. Ergative agreement in Atakapa is complex, and can be divided into two categories:
                                                                                    
          verbal agreement and nominal agreement. In the verb in the aorist mode, Atakapa has a split-s
                                                                                    
          system (Dixon, 1994:70-110). There is a set of Agent (A) pronominal suffixes (-o / -cel / -tem /
                                                                                    
          -ul which inflect the majority of verbs, be they transitive or intransitive, and there is a set of
                                                                                    
          Object (O) pronominal prefixes (hi-, n̥-, iš-, nak-, šak-) which usually indicate the direct or
                                                                                    
          indirect object of a verb. The O prefixes, however, in the aorist mark the subjects of certain
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          intransitive verbs the action of which is not under the control of the subject, such as makáw ‘fall’
                                                                                    
          and hiwálš ‘dream.’ The O prefixes also mark the subject of a handful of transitive verbs, the
                                                                                    
          most notable of which are ké ‘have something,’ kóh, ‘want something,’ and úhc ‘know
                                                                                    
          something,’ and their negative counterparts háhš, óŋš, and awš. The language also allows fluid-
                                                                                    
          S marking (see Dixon, 1994:78-83, for the concept).                       
                                                                                    
            The first split comes in the preterite and dubitative modes where first- and second-person
                                                                                    
          subjects of all verbs are marked with the O prefixes, while the third person subjects are inflected
                                                                                    
          with the A suffixes (this is only overt in the third-person plural, as the third-person singular is
                                                                                    
          unmarked). The second split occurs in the progressive, future, and dependent modes, in which
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          all verbs in all persons are inflected for subject with the O prefixes. This system creates
                                                                                    
          ambiguities which the speakers seemed willing to tolerate, for example himišat is segmented hi-
                                                                                    
          ø-miš-at and the morphemes can be understood as 1SSTATS-3SOBJ-give-PRET ‘I gave it to him,’
                                                                                    
          or hi-miš-ø-at 1SO-give-3SS-PRET ‘He gave it to me.’ These can be disambiguated with either
                                                                                    
          the subject pronoun being inflected for the ergative case, as in examples 400 or the object
                                                                                    
          pronoun being inflected with the directional case, as in example 401. However, the speakers
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         185                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          often produced the forms without disambiguating pronouns, some of which Gatschet often added
                                                                                    
          when reviewed the notes with them.                                        
                                                                                    
               [haˊk himiˊcat]                                                      
                                                                                    
          400) há·k himíšat                                                         
                                                                                    
               ha-ik          hi-miš-ø-at                                           
                                                                                    
               s/he-ERG.AGNT  1SO-give-3SS-PRET                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘He gave it to me.’ (1932:31:2)                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [weˊhet himiˊcat]                                                    
                                                                                    
          401) wéhet himíšat                                                        
                                                                                    
               wehet     hi-miš-ø-at                                                
                                                                                    
               I(DIR)    1SO-give-3SS-PRET                                          
                                                                                    
               ‘He gave it to me.’ (1932:80:2)                                      
                                                                                    
            The ergative case is highly restricted in Atakapa. Only the subjects of verbs with the
                                                                                    
          semantic roles of AFFECT and GIVING (Dixon, 1994:7) can be inflected with the ergative case. In
                                                                                    
          addition, noun phrases are marked with the ergative case only if two conditions are present: first,
                                                                                    
          the noun marked with the ergative case must be the agent of the action of a transitive verb, not
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          simply the subject of that verb, and second, the object of the action of the transitive verb must be
                                                                                    
          human and animate.1 Body parts, which are animate nouns in Atakapa, lack the feature of being
                                                                                    
          human, so subject of verbs referring to actions on human body parts are not marked with the
                                                                                    
          ergative case.                                                            
                                                                                    
          Fluid-S marking. Because of the broadness of the translations of the example sentences in the
                                                                                    
          dictionary proving the existence of fluid-s marking sometimes has to rely on morphological
                                                                                    
          evidence. Some Atakapa verbs can be inflected in the aorist either with active or stative subject
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         186                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          marking. Because of the semantics of the verbs involved, stative subject marking seems to
                                                                                    
          indicate accidental or non-volitional action on the part of the subject, while active subject
                                                                                    
          marking seems to indicate the volitional action of the subject.           
                                                                                    
               {tolhópshik hiatká-ushat}                                            
                                                                                    
          402a) tolhópšik hihatkáwšat                                               
                                                                                    
               tolhopš-ik     hi-hat-kawš-at                                        
                                                                                    
               needle-ERG.INSTR 1SSTATS-REFLEX-prick-PRET                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I accidentally pricked myself with a needle.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:63)2 
                                                                                    
               [toloˊpcik hatkaˊuco]                                                
                                                                                    
          402b) tolhópšik hatkáwšo                                                  
                                                                                    
               tolhopš-ik     hat-kawš-o                                            
                                                                                    
               needle-ERG.INSTR REFLEX-prick-1SS                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I pricked myself with a needle on purpose.’ (1932:61:2)             
                                                                                    
               [hiˊtix̥ t]                                                          
                                                                                    
          403a) hitìht                                                              
                                                                                    
               hi-tiht                                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               1SSTATS-lie                                                          
                                                                                    
               ‘I am lying down.’ (1932:132:2)                                      
                                                                                    
               [wi koˊmep tiˊhito]                                                  
                                                                                    
          403b) wi kómip tíhto                                                      
                                                                                    
               wi   kom-ip    tiht-o                                                
                                                                                    
               my   belly-INESS lie-1SS                                             
                                                                                    
               ‘I lie on my belly.’ (1932:132:2)                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         187                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [haihaiˊco]                                                          
                                                                                    
          404a) hayháyšo                                                            
                                                                                    
               hayhayš-o                                                            
                                                                                    
               weep-1SS                                                             
                                                                                    
               ‘I wept’                                                             
                                                                                    
               [hihaihaiˊc]                                                         
                                                                                    
          404b) hihayháyš                                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               hi-hayhayš                                                           
                                                                                    
               1SSTATS-weep                                                         
                                                                                    
               ‘I burst into tears.’                                                
                                                                                    
          In the following example, the verb óŋš, which is usually inflected in the aorist as a stative verb,
                                                                                    
          as in 405a, is inflected in 405b as an active verb, indicating that in the opinion of the speaker the
                                                                                    
          action of not liking is more under the control of the subject, and in fact is making a moral
                                                                                    
          judgement about the subject. The nominal subject is not in the ergative case because the verb
                                                                                    
          does not fit the narrow semantic requirements for ergative marking.       
                                                                                    
               [hakīt cakoñc]                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          405a) hakít šakóŋš                                                        
                                                                                    
               hakit šak-oŋš                                                        
                                                                                    
               they 3PLSTATS-not.want                                               
                                                                                    
               ‘They do not want it / They do not like it.’ (1932:98:1)             
                                                                                    
               {kiwílsh yukíti shakónshûl}                                          
                                                                                    
          405b) kiwilš yukhíti šakoŋšul                                             
                                                                                    
               kiwilš         yukhiti   šak-oŋš-ul                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         188                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               white.people   Indian    3PLO-not.like-3PLS                          
                                                                                    
               ‘White people do not like the Indians.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:80)         
                                                                                    
          Word order. The basic word order of an Atakapa sentence is Subject Object Verb, whether or
                                                                                    
          not the subject is in the ergative case or is absolutive.                 
                                                                                    
               [caˊ-ik cukteˊ-i hatse-eˊc miˊculat]                                 
                                                                                    
          406) šáik šoktéy hacehéš míšulat                                          
                                                                                    
               ša-ik               šoktey    haceheš   ø-miš-ul-at                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               someone-ERG.AGNT    medicine  bad(sg)   3OBJ-give-3PLS-PRET          
                                                                                    
               ‘Some people gave them bad medicine.’ (1932:17:112-13)               
                                                                                    
               [wīc wi itēˊt iyaniaˊn haˊxcat]                                      
                                                                                    
          407) wí·š wi ité·t hiyanyánháhšat                                         
                                                                                    
               wi-iš wi  ite·t hi-yanyan-hahš-at                                    
                                                                                    
               I-FOC my  father 1SSTATS-fear-NEG-PRET                               
                                                                                    
               ‘I did not fear my father.’ (1932:16:103)                            
                                                                                    
               {tú hōpké kaukáu tá-u iníχkit}                                       
                                                                                    
          408) tú hóp ké kawkáw tawiníhkit                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               tu   hop  ø-ke      kawkaw    taw-ø-inih-kit                         
                                                                                    
               boat hole 3SSTATS-have water  STAND-3STATS-come.in-PROG(SG)          
                                                                                    
               ‘The boat has a hole; water is coming in.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:165)     
                                                                                    
               [caˊkiol katnaˊu cak ́āˊx̥ c]                                        
                                                                                    
          409) šakyòl katnáw šakháhš                                                
                                                                                    
               šakyol    katnaw    šak-hahš                                         
                                                                                    
               man       beard     3PLSTATS-not.have                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         189                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘Men do not have beards.’ (1932:10:24)                               
                                                                                    
          Moving the object to the front of the sentence gives it extra prominence. 
                                                                                    
               {Ló hilá-i yok’hití winé-ulat kā́shki}                               
                                                                                    
          410) ló hiláy yukhìti winéulat káškin.                                    
                                                                                    
               lo   hilay yukhiti  wine-ul-at     kaš-kin                           
                                                                                    
               PN   wife Indian    find-3PLS-PRET be.high.tide-WHEN                 
                                                                                    
               ‘The Indians found Lo’s wife at high tide.’ (Gatschet 1885b:98)      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [kakauˊ itaˊns utskaˊucat]                                           
                                                                                    
          411) kakáw itáns uckáwšat                                                 
                                                                                    
               kakaw itans    uckawš-ø-at                                           
                                                                                    
               sun  clouds    cover-3SS-PRET                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘Clouds covered the sun.’ (1932:53:2)                                
                                                                                    
          When adjectives are not used as verbs, they follow the nouns they modify. Quantifiers, such as
                                                                                    
          héw in example 412, also follow the nouns they modify.                    
                                                                                    
               [Cok heˊ-u cakwaˊnts uˊxtsăt]                                        
                                                                                    
          412) šok héw šakwánc úhcat                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               šok  hew  šak-wanc  ø-uhc-at                                         
                                                                                    
               Thing many 3PLO-tell 3STATS-be.able-PRET                             
                                                                                    
               ‘She was able to tell them many things.’ (1932:15:84)                
                                                                                    
               [Icāk cuk’hēˊc kaˊ-ukin vīˊwulat cok hatse-eˊc hiweˊ-u kaˊ-at]       
                                                                                    
          413) iša·k šoké·š káwkin wíwulat šok hacehéš hiwéw káat                   
                                                                                    
               iša·k šoke·š ø-kaw-kin   wiw-u-lat      šok  haceheš hiwew           
                                                                                    
               person sick 3STATS-die-WHEN believe-3PLS-PRET thing bad very         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         190                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ka-at                                                                
                                                                                    
               do-PRET                                                              
                                                                                    
               ‘After someone sick died, they believed that something very bad had done it.’
                                                                                    
               (1932:18:118-119)                                                    
                                                                                    
          414) [nē-cilcnăˊn iˊl toˊlka ciˊlcntat]                                   
                                                                                    
               ne·šilšnán íl tólka šílšn̥tat                                        
                                                                                    
               ne·šilšnan il  tolka šilš-n̥t-at                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               broom     new  well sweep-CONT-PRET                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘A new broom always sweeps well.’ (resultative preterite) (1932:112:1)
                                                                                    
          Temporal phrases occur either at the beginning of a sentence, or after the final verb of the
                                                                                    
          sentence.                                                                 
                                                                                    
               [Itiˊ tanuˊk okinuˊlulat haˊ aˊñkin]                                 
                                                                                    
          415) ití tanúk hokinúlulat ha áŋkin                                       
                                                                                    
               ití  tanuk hok-inul-ul-at     ha   aŋ-kin                            
                                                                                    
               night one RECIP-gather-3PLS-PRET his house-LOC                       
                                                                                    
               ‘One night they gathered together at his/her house.’ (1932:17:113-14)
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [cukaˊulat itiˊ maˊñ mōn]                                            
                                                                                    
          416) šoká·kulat ití máŋ mo·n                                              
                                                                                    
               šoka·k-ul-at        ití  maŋ  mo·n                                   
                                                                                    
               ceremonial.dance-3PLS-PRET night long all                            
                                                                                    
               ‘They did ceremonial dancing all night long.’ (1932:17-18:114-15)    
                                                                                    
          Adverbs, both simple and derived, are usually placed directly before the verbs that they modify.
                                                                                    
               [hāc noˊmc tanuˊk ipuˊts ke]                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         191                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          417) há·š nómš tanúk ipúc ke                                              
                                                                                    
               ha-iš     nomš tanuk ipuc ø-ke                                       
                                                                                    
               s/he-FOC  child one only 3STATS-have                                 
                                                                                    
               ‘He has only one child.’ (1932:49:2)                                 
                                                                                    
               {néšh akilî́kš tólka láu háχsh}                                      
                                                                                    
          418) néš akilíkš tólka láwháhš                                            
                                                                                    
               neš  akilikš   tolka law-ø-hahš                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               wood wet       well burn-3SS-NEG                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘Wet wood does not burn well.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:83)                  
                                                                                    
          Locative phrases in the locative, inessive, and elative cases usually occur before the main verb of
                                                                                    
          the sentence. Nominal objects occur before the locative phrase, but if there is an emphasis on the
                                                                                    
          locative, it may precede the object, as in examples 421 and 422.          
                                                                                    
          Locative:                                                                 
                                                                                    
               [neˊc palpaˊl aˊnkin nûˊn-kētntat]                                   
                                                                                    
          419) néšpalpaláŋkin núŋke·tn̥tat                                          
                                                                                    
               neš-pal,pal-aŋ-kin       nuŋ-ke·t-n̥t-at                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               wood-,REDUP,flat-house-LOC village-dwell-CONTIN-PRET                 
                                                                                    
               ‘She lived in the village in a split-plank house.’ (1932:14:74)      
                                                                                    
               [Iˊcāk nīt aˊñlaˊkin cakinaˊ-uculat]                                 
                                                                                    
          420) iša·k ní·t áŋlá·kkin šakináwšulat                                    
                                                                                    
               iša·k ni·t aŋla·k-kin šak-inawš-ul-at                                
                                                                                    
               man  five jail-LOC  3PLO-put.in-3PLS-PRET                            
                                                                                    
               ‘They put five men in jail.’ (1932:20:148)                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         192                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Yukiˊt nuˊnkin puˊm ichāˊxc a itiyiˊlc]                             
                                                                                    
          421) yukít núŋkin púm išháhš á itiyílš                                    
                                                                                    
               yukit nuŋ-kin  pum       iš-hahš        a    itiyilš                 
                                                                                    
               our  village-LOC dance   1PLSTATS-not.have this month                
                                                                                    
               ‘We are not having a dance in our village this month.’ (1932:13:53)  
                                                                                    
               [kidsoˊnc wi ukutkaˊ-uc maˊñkin tehoˊp laˊwat]                       
                                                                                    
          422) kicóŋš wi okotkáwšmáŋkin tehóp láwat                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               kicoŋš wi okotkawš-máŋ-kin tehop law-ø-at                            
                                                                                    
               fire my   shirt-long-LOC hole burn-3SS-PRET                          
                                                                                    
               ‘The fire burned a hole in my coat.’ (1932:79:2)                     
                                                                                    
          Inessive:                                                                 
                                                                                    
               [Yuk’híti icāk wāci a nēp nūn nultíhinst]                            
                                                                                    
          423) yukhíti išá·k wáši a né·p nuŋnùltíhin̥st                             
                                                                                    
               yukhiti   iša·k     waši a    ne·-ip                                 
                                                                                    
               Indian    people    old  this land-INESS                             
                                                                                    
               nuŋ-nul-tihi-n̥st                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               village-live- PST.PROG-CUSTOM                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘The old Indian people customarily used to live in villages in this land.’ (1932:9:1)
                                                                                    
               [puˊmudl naˊ-u haˊkit icaˊtip hatnaˊ-inst? hatiˊdsom]                
                                                                                    
          424) púmuƛ náw hakit išá·tip hatnáwn̥st hathícam                          
                                                                                    
               pum-ul-h       naw       hakit iša·t-ip hat-naw-n̥st                 
                                                                                    
               dance-3PLS-TOP feather   they head-INESS REFLEX-put-CUSTOM           
                                                                                    
               hat-hicam                                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         193                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               REFLEX-join.together                                                 
                                                                                    
               ‘They dance, and they customarily put feathers together on their heads.’ (1932:10:25-26)
                                                                                    
          Elative:                                                                  
                                                                                    
               [kaukaˊ-u aˊm’n aˊnike ntaˊhĕntat]                                   
                                                                                    
          425) kawkáw ámn̥ ánike n̥táhn̥ tat                                        
                                                                                    
               kawkaw    ø-am-n̥        an-ike    n̥tah-n̥t-at                      
                                                                                    
               water     3STATS-drink-WHEN ear-EL come.out-CONTIN-PRET              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘When he drank water, it kept on coming out of his ears. (1932:10:19-20)
                                                                                    
               [yā icak akipai-iˊke ōt]                                             
                                                                                    
          426) ya išá·k akipáyike ók                                                
                                                                                    
               ya   iša·k     akipay-ike ok-ø                                       
                                                                                    
               that person    south-EL  come-3SS                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘That man comes from the south.’ (1932:24:1)                         
                                                                                    
          In natural texts, nouns in the directional case follow the main verb in the sentence, as in
                                                                                    
          examples 427 and 428. In elicited examples, they can occur before; some of these examples
                                                                                    
          occur with the verb míš ‘to give’ and seem to disambiguate pronoun objects. Also, if the noun in
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          the directional case can be understood in a locative sense, then the form occurs before the verb,
                                                                                    
          as is usual with other locative expressions.                              
                                                                                    
               [Tawatweˊnăt Utsutaˊt ut. Cukaˊkulĕt Utsutaˊt ut.]                   
                                                                                    
          427) tawwatwénat ocottá·tot šoká·kulat ocottá·tot                         
                                                                                    
               taw-hat-wen-ø-at         ocotta·t-ot šoka·k-ul-at                    
                                                                                    
               STAND-REFLEX-pray-3S-PRET PN-DIR   ceremonial.dance-3PL-PRET         
                                                                                    
               ocotta·t-ot                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         194                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               PN-DIR                                                               
                                                                                    
               ‘They stood and prayed to She-who-stands-above; they did a ceremonial dance to She-
                                                                                    
               who-stands-above. (1932:9-10:14-15)                                  
                                                                                    
               [Yuk’hiˊt itēˊt peˊl (Cyprien) icaˊk toˊkat yukiˊt noˊmc oˊt]        
                                                                                    
          428) yukít ité·tpél <Cyprien> iša·k tólat yukít nómšot                    
                                                                                    
               yukit ite·t-pel <Cyprien> iša·k ø-tol-at     yukit nomš-ot           
                                                                                    
               our  father-far PN       person 3STATS-good-PRET we child-DIR        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘Our step-father Cyprien was a good man to us children.’ (1932:16:101-02)
                                                                                    
               [haˊ ot miˊcat]                                                      
                                                                                    
          429) háot míšat                                                           
                                                                                    
               ha-ot     ø-miš-ø-at                                                 
                                                                                    
               he-DIR    3SO-give-3SS-PRET                                          
                                                                                    
               ‘He gave it to him’ (1932:32:1)                                      
                                                                                    
               [Yukiˊti mōˊne oˊk-inuˊlulat imōˊc oˊt tiˊune]                       
                                                                                    
          430) yukhíti mó·ni hokinúlulat himó·šot tíwne                             
                                                                                    
               yukhiti   mo·ni     hok-inul-ul-at      himo·š-ot tiw-ne             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Indian    all(human) RECIP-gather-3PLS-PRET burial-DIR go(pl)-GER    
                                                                                    
               ‘All the Indians gathered together to go to the burial.’ (1932:18:125-26)
                                                                                    
          Locative compounds. In addition to a verb accompanied by a noun in the locative case, a noun
                                                                                    
          of location can be compounded with a verb to indicate the action taking place in the location of
                                                                                    
          the noun. The four examples noted are nuŋké·t (sg) / nuŋnúl (pl) ‘to live in a village,’ (núŋ
                                                                                    
          ‘village;’ ké·t / núl ‘sit; dwell’), tukémš ‘to row in a boat.’ (tú ‘boat;’ kémš ‘to row’), and tuké·t
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         195                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ‘to sit in a boat.’ Compare examples 431 and 432, which illustrate the same notion expressed
                                                                                    
          first by a locative phrase, and second by a locative compound.            
                                                                                    
               [yukiˊti nuˊnkin kēˊt’ntat Yuk’hiˊti Tuˊl toˊlpot inoˊ]              
                                                                                    
          431) yukhíti núŋkin ké·tn̥tat yukhíti túl tólpot inó                      
                                                                                    
               yukhiti nuŋ-kin ke·t-n̥t-at   yukhiti   tul  tolpot ino              
                                                                                    
               Indian village-LOC dwell-CONTIN-PRET Indian lake east side           
                                                                                    
               ‘She used to live in an Indian village on the east side of Lake Prien (Indian Lake).’
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               (1932:14:71)                                                         
                                                                                    
               [neˊc palpaˊl aˊnkin nûˊn-kētntat]                                   
                                                                                    
          432) néšpalpaláŋkin nuŋkè·tn̥tat                                          
                                                                                    
               neš-pal,pal-aŋ-kin       nuŋ-ke·t-n̥t-at                             
                                                                                    
               wood-,REDUP,flat-house-LOC village-dwell-CONTIN-PRET                 
                                                                                    
               ‘She lived in the village in a split-plank house.’ (1932:14:74)      
                                                                                    
               [Yuk’hiˊti icāk wāci a nēp nūn nultiˊhinst]                          
                                                                                    
          433) yukhíti iša·k wáši a né·p nuŋnúltíhin̥st                             
                                                                                    
               yukhiti   iša·k     waši a    ne·-ip                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Indian    people    old  this land-INESS                             
                                                                                    
               nuŋ-nul-tihi-n̥st                                                    
                                                                                    
               village-live- PST.PROG-CUSTOM                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘The old Indian people customarily used to live in villages in this land.’ (1932:9:1)
                                                                                    
               [ntaˊn tuˊ-kēˊmc icwāˊñĕhĕ]                                          
                                                                                    
          434) n̥tán tukémšišwáŋehe                                                 
                                                                                    
               n̥tan     tu-kemš-iš-waŋ-ehe                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         196                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               be.or     boat-row-1PLSTATS-go.about-DUB                             
                                                                                    
               ‘…or we might go about rowing in a boat.’ (1932:13:46)               
                                                                                    
               [icāk tuˊkēt]                                                        
                                                                                    
          435) išá·k tuké·t                                                         
                                                                                    
               iša·k tu-ke·t-ø                                                      
                                                                                    
               man  boat-sit(sg)-3SS (1932:61:2)                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘A man is sitting in a boat.’                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Focus. Atakapa has a suffix -iš / -š, used with nouns, noun phrases, and pronouns, that marks
                                                                                    
          the change of the prominent topic of a discourse. It is extremely common in the example
                                                                                    
          sentences, probably because in elicitation, shifting between sentences was perceived by
                                                                                    
          Gatschet’s consultants as a change in focus.                              
                                                                                    
               {há án nēp}                                                          
                                                                                    
          436) ha áŋ né·p                                                           
                                                                                    
               ha     aŋ      ø-ne·p                                                
                                                                                    
               his/her house  3STATS-be.low                                         
                                                                                    
               ‘His/her house is low.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:6)                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               {yukít ángsh nēp}                                                    
                                                                                    
          437) yukít áŋš né·p                                                       
                                                                                    
               yukit  aŋ-š         ø-ne·p                                           
                                                                                    
               our    house-FOC    3STATS-be.low                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘Our house is low.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:6)                              
                                                                                    
               {ití hi-iwáleshat}                                                   
                                                                                    
          438) ití hihiwálšat                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         197                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ití  hi-hiwalš-at                                                    
                                                                                    
               night 1SSTATS-dream-PRET                                             
                                                                                    
               ‘I dreamed last night.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:10)                         
                                                                                    
               {a-ití-ish hiwáleshta}                                               
                                                                                    
          439) á itíiš hiwálšta                                                     
                                                                                    
               a    ití-iš    hiwalš-ta                                             
                                                                                    
               this night-FOC dream-PCPL                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I am to dream tonight.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:10)3                       
                                                                                    
          In the following natural text, Tottokš has been focusing on her grandfather and his household.
                                                                                    
          When she changes the topic to her mother, she uses the focus form of the pronoun há ‘he/she.’
                                                                                    
          wi kulša káwkinya há·š yilké                                              
                                                                                    
           túl maynóy cípšatya išicyúcišat                                          
                                                                                    
          When my grandfather died, then she got married,                           
                                                                                    
           moved to the other side of the lake, and raised us.                      
                                                                                    
          A little later in the same text, Tottokš is talking about her stepfather Cyprien. Then, switching
                                                                                    
          the topic to her own reactions to him, she uses the focus form of the pronoun wí, ‘I,’ then,
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          switching the topic back to her stepfather, she uses the focus form of há again.
                                                                                    
          išyucyucya tanúkip šoháh išpácháhat                                       
                                                                                    
           wí·š wi ité·t hiyanyánháhšat                                             
                                                                                    
            paytólušat wíot                                                         
                                                                                    
          hiyúckin há·š okwáŋšot tíšatya káwat                                      
                                                                                    
          He raised us and never beat us even once.                                 
                                                                                    
           I was not afraid of my father.                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         198                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            He was truly generous to me.                                            
                                                                                    
          When I was grown, he went to war and died.                                
                                                                                    
          Another example can be found in Text 5, where Tottokš is talking about her cousin Kišmok/
                                                                                    
          Ponponne. She is talking about her cousin, then when she switches and talks about her own
                                                                                    
          family, she uses the focus form of the pronoun yukít ‘we,’ then when she switches the topic back
                                                                                    
          to her cousin, she uses the focus form of há, ‘he/she.’                   
                                                                                    
          iyáŋ ké·tntat yukíts túl maynóy išicyúckin                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          há·š hipá háhšat hiúhc atkákiya                                           
                                                                                    
           néšpalpaláŋkin núŋke·tntat                                               
                                                                                    
          There she lived while we grew up on the other side of the lake            
                                                                                    
           She did not have a husband from the time that I knew her,                
                                                                                    
            and she lived in the village in a split-plank house.                    
                                                                                    
          Focus forms are used to disambiguate subjects and objects of transitive stative verbs; the focus
                                                                                    
          form of a noun or pronoun indicates the subject. The ergative case is not used because the
                                                                                    
          subject is not considered to be in complete control of the action of the verb.
                                                                                    
               {hilḗmsh}                                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          440) hilé·mš                                                              
                                                                                    
               hi-ø-le·mš          hi-ø-le·mš                                       
                                                                                    
               1SO-3STATS-love     1SSTATS-3SO-love                                 
                                                                                    
               ‘He loves me.’      ‘I love him.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:58)               
                                                                                    
               {wish há ilēmsh}                                                     
                                                                                    
          441) wí·š há hilé·mš                                                      
                                                                                    
               wi-iš ha  hi-ø-le·mš                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         199                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               I-FOC s/he 1SSTATS-3SO-love                                          
                                                                                    
               ‘I love him.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:58)                                   
                                                                                    
          Clausal complements. Verbs such as wán ‘to say,’ wíw ‘to believe,’ náy ‘to think,’ hú ‘to see,’
                                                                                    
          and ná·kš ‘to hear’ take independent clauses as complements. Verbs such as óŋš ‘not to want’
                                                                                    
          and nám ‘to beg’ require the verb of the complement clause to be in the form of a gerund; this
                                                                                    
          construction can be understood as a relative clause equivalent.           
                                                                                    
               [Atsiˊc-kic haˊ waˊnat]                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          442) “hihaccíškišháh,” wánat                                              
                                                                                    
               hi-hat-ciškiš-hah        wan-ø-at                                    
                                                                                    
               1SSTATS-REFLEX-be.pleased-NEG say-3SS-PRET                           
                                                                                    
               ‘“I am not pleased,” she said.’ (1932:20:143)                        
                                                                                    
               [wic ivīˊv há coˊx̥ ’nwaˊnkit]                                       
                                                                                    
          443) wí·š hiwíwhah šokn̥wánkit                                            
                                                                                    
               wi·š hi-wiw-hah          šok-n̥ -wan-kit                             
                                                                                    
               I-FOC 1SSTAT-believe-NEG STH-2SSTATS-say-PROG                        
                                                                                    
               ‘I do not believe anything you are saying.’ (1932:34:2)              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [yiˊl toˊl tsaˊk hiˊnay]                                             
                                                                                    
          444) yíl tólcák hinày                                                     
                                                                                    
               yil  ø-tol-cak      hi-nay                                           
                                                                                    
               day  3S-be.good-be.dry 1SSTATS-think                                 
                                                                                    
               ‘I think the day will be good and dry.’                              
                                                                                    
               {shakiól shkalít haihaísh nā́ksho}                                   
                                                                                    
          445) šakyól škalít hayháyš ná·kšo                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         200                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               šakyol škalit hayhayš-ø na·kš-o                                      
                                                                                    
               male child weep-3SS hear-1SS                                         
                                                                                    
               ‘I hear a boy weeping.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:122)                        
                                                                                    
               [paknaˊ-u wan năn hioˊñc]                                            
                                                                                    
          446) paknáwwáŋne nhióŋš                                                   
                                                                                    
               paknaw-waŋ-ne  n-hi-oŋš                                              
                                                                                    
               run-go.about-GER 2SO-1SSTATS-not.to.want                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I don’t want you to go running about.’ (1932:101:2)                 
                                                                                    
               [Kēˊtne naˊmtsel tiˊc hāˊxcne]                                       
                                                                                    
          447) ké·tne námcel tišhahšne                                              
                                                                                    
               ke·t-ne   nam-cel   tiš-hahš-ne                                      
                                                                                    
               stay-GER  beg-1PLS  go(sg)-NEG-GER                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘We begged her to stay and not to go.’ (1932:17:110-111)             
                                                                                    
          Non-verbal copular sentences. In addition to copular sentences produced by the verbalization
                                                                                    
          of nouns as discussed above in Chapter 2, when two nouns are understood to be simple
                                                                                    
          equivalents, they can be placed in apposition to one another.             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [haˊ Yuk’hiˊti ēñ Konāˊc]                                            
                                                                                    
          448) ha yukhíti é·ŋ koná·š                                                
                                                                                    
               ha   yukhiti   e·ŋ  kona·š                                           
                                                                                    
               his  Indian    name PN                                               
                                                                                    
               ‘His Indian name is Kona·š.’ (1932:15:82-83)                         
                                                                                    
               [haˊ ca aˊ]                                                          
                                                                                    
          449) há ša á                                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         201                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ha   ša        a                                                     
                                                                                    
               he   someone   Q                                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘Who is he?’ (1932:108:1)                                            
                                                                                    
          Conjunction and disjunction. Noun phrases and verb phrases are treated differently in Atakapa
                                                                                    
          in terms of conjunction. Noun phrases, when not joined by apposition alone, are conjoined with
                                                                                    
          the clitic =n̥, which is a syllabic nasal, while verb phrases are connected by the clitic =ya. Both
                                                                                    
          clitics are written by Gatschet and Swanton as separate words, because their equivalents in
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          English and German are separate words. However, there is evidence both in the publication and
                                                                                    
          Gatschet’s field notes that both elements were attached to an adjoining word, and that is how
                                                                                    
          they are treated here.                                                    
                                                                                    
          Nominal Conjunction and Disjunction. More than two nouns in sequence are joined by simple
                                                                                    
          apposition, as in the following example:                                  
                                                                                    
               [iyāˊñ tīˊv ia naˊ-u oxoˊx icyāˊmcne aˊyip kună kaxlōˊpc tsăma kuˊts coxmōˊn
                                                                                    
          450) iyáŋ tíwya náwohóh išyá·mšne áyip konán kathópš cimakúc šokmó·n      
                                                                                    
               icyāˊmcĕhĕ Kidsoˊnkckin (i)cakwāktikit]                              
                                                                                    
               išyá·mšehe kicóŋškin iššakwáktikit                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               iyaŋ tiw=ya    nawohoh   iš-ya·mš-ne         ay-ip     konan         
                                                                                    
               there go=and   chinquapin 2PLSTATS-gather-GER swamp-LOC potato       
                                                                                    
               kathopš   cimakuc   šok-mo·n  iš-ya·mš-ehe        kicoŋš-kin         
                                                                                    
               waterlily crawfish  thing-all 2PLSTATS-gather-DUB fire-LOC           
                                                                                    
               iš-šak-wak-tikit                                                     
                                                                                    
               1PLSTATS-3PL.OBJ-roast-FUT                                           
                                                                                    
               ‘Us going there and gathering chinquapins; we may gather everything, duck
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         202                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               potatoes, waterlilies, and crawfish. We shall roast them in the fire.’ (1932:13:47-49)
                                                                                    
          However, when two nouns alone are linked, the clitic =n̥ is used. Note that in the first example,
                                                                                    
          the clitic can mean ‘or’ as well as ‘and.’                                
                                                                                    
               [cikoˊm ‘n canuˊk haˊxcĕt]                                           
                                                                                    
          451) šikómn̥ canúk háhšat                                                 
                                                                                    
               šikom=n̥  canuk     ø-hahš-at                                        
                                                                                    
               cow=and   horse     3STATS-not.have-PRET                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘She did not have cows or horses.’ (1932:15:80)                      
                                                                                    
               [ickiciˊl ēñ Louison Yuk’hiˊti ēñ Yoyoˊt ‘n Kic Yuˊts]               
                                                                                    
          452) iškišíl é·ŋ <Louison> yukhíti é·ŋ yoyótn̥ kišyúc                     
                                                                                    
               iškišíl   é·ŋ  <Louison> yukhíti   é·ŋ  yoyót=n̥  kišyúc             
                                                                                    
               daughter  name PN        Indian    name PN=and    PN                 
                                                                                    
               ‘Her daughter’s name is Louison; her Indian names are Yoyót and Kišyúts.’
                                                                                    
               (1932:15:83-84)                                                      
                                                                                    
          There is one example of a phrase in which multiple nouns are linked with -n̥. This phrase was
                                                                                    
          provided as a translation of the word ‘world.’                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               {nē n’itans’n icāk’n mōni}                                           
                                                                                    
          453) né·n̥ itánšn̥ išá·kn̥ mó·ni                                          
                                                                                    
               ne·=n̥    itanš=n̥       iša·k=n̥  mo·ni                             
                                                                                    
               earth=and sky/cloud=and  person=and all(animate)                     
                                                                                    
               ‘The earth and sky and people and all living things.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:87)
                                                                                    
          Verbal Conjunction and Disjunction. Sentences that are joined are linked by the clitic =ya.
                                                                                    
          When the verbs in the conjoined sentences are co-referential, the verb in the first sentence does
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         203                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          not have subject, mode, or aspect marking; all the latter are found on the final verb of the
                                                                                    
          following sentence. If the sentences have different subjects, then each verb bears the appropriate
                                                                                    
          marking, as in example 457; if the verbs have no causal or temporal relationship, they also retain
                                                                                    
          the appropriate marking, as in example 458. This construction is used when the actions described
                                                                                    
          by the verbs occur in sequential order. In one place in the field notes (1885b:141), Gatschet
                                                                                    
          glosses =ya with hál ‘afterwards,’ confirming that the action of the second verb follows that of
                                                                                    
          the first.                                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Kaˊ-u oˊkin toˊkc ya imōˊculat]                                     
                                                                                    
          454) káw ókkin tókšya himó·šulat                                          
                                                                                    
               kaw       ok-kin    tokš=ya        himo·š-ul-at                      
                                                                                    
               dead.person cloth-LOC wrap=and     bury-3PLS-PRET                    
                                                                                    
               ‘They wrapped the dead person in cloth and buried him/her.’ (1932:18:126)
                                                                                    
               [Imōˊc mak māˊñ kaˊ ya hoˊxp naˊ-ulat coˊ itaˊxne]                   
                                                                                    
          455) himo·šmak máŋ káya hóp náwulat šó hitáhne                            
                                                                                    
               himo·š-mak maŋ ka=ya     hop  naw-ul-at      šo                      
                                                                                    
               grave-mound long make=and hole leave-3PLS-PRET soul                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               hitah-ne                                                             
                                                                                    
               come-out-GER                                                         
                                                                                    
               ‘They made a long grave-mound, and left a hole for the soul to come out.’ (1932:19:139-
                                                                                    
               140)                                                                 
                                                                                    
               [icāˊk taˊ-ic oˊkian yukīt nēˊ moˊn ialpeˊhiulĕt]                    
                                                                                    
          456) iša·k táyš ókya yukít né· mo·n yalpéhiulat                           
                                                                                    
               iša·k     tayš      ok=ya     yukit ne· mo·n yal-pehi-ul-at          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         204                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               person    strange   come=and  our  land all  take-finish-3PLS-PRET   
                                                                                    
               ‘Strange people have come and completely taken all our land.’ (1932:125:1)
                                                                                    
               {wi kitsāk ámwangyě himakáwět}                                       
                                                                                    
          457) wí kicá·k ámwáŋya himakáwat                                          
                                                                                    
               wi   kica·k    am-waŋ=ya      hi-makaw-at                            
                                                                                    
               I    whiskey   drink-go.about=and 1SSTATS-fall-PRET                  
                                                                                    
               ‘I was going about drinking whiskey, and I fell down.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:86)
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [īclaˊuc taˊtik kaˊwat yaˊ haˊ nuˊnkin imoˊculat]                    
                                                                                    
          458) hišláwš tá·tik káwatya ha núŋkin himó·šulat                          
                                                                                    
               hišlawš   ta·t-ik        ø-kaw-at=ya         ha   nuŋ-kin            
                                                                                    
               fever     yellow-ERG.INSTR 3SSTATS-die-PRET=and her village-LOC      
                                                                                    
               himo·š-ul-at                                                         
                                                                                    
               bury-3PLS-PRET                                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘She died of yellow fever, and they buried her in her village.’ (1932:15:88-89)
                                                                                    
               [Kic moˊkat yaˊ yoˊlĕt]                                              
                                                                                    
          459) kiš mókatya yó·lat                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               kiš       ø-mok-at=ya         ø-yo·l-at                              
                                                                                    
               woman     3STATS-be.short-PRET=and 3STATS-be.ill.tempered-PRET       
                                                                                    
               ‘She was a short woman and an ill-tempered one.’ (1932:15:78-80)     
                                                                                    
          When alternatives are offered in a sequence of sentences, they are joined by the verb n̥ tán, ‘to be
                                                                                    
          either/or.’ If the alternatives are mutually exclusive, the form n̥tánat is used, which looks like a
                                                                                    
          preterite form, although the semantics are different from what one would expect from a preterite.
                                                                                    
               [Yiˊl mōn taˊ-i ō hoˊktiwē icwāˊñĕhĕ ‘ntaˊn neˊc-paˊl idsonˊkin toˊ(h)i-a
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         205                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          460) yíl mo·n táy ó hoktiwé·išwáŋehe n̥tán nešpalhicónkin tóhiya          
                                                                                    
               loˊx̥ kin tiˊu-sakioˊns icwāˊñĕhĕ ntaˊn tuˊ-kēˊmc icwāˊñĕhĕ]         
                                                                                    
               lókkin tiwšakn̥óns išwáŋehe n̥tán tukémšišwáŋehe                     
                                                                                    
               yil  mo·n tay  o     hok-tiwe·-iš-waŋ-ehe         n̥tan              
                                                                                    
               day  all  river beside RECIP-be.together-1PLSTATS-go.about-DUB be.or 
                                                                                    
               nešpalhicon-kin tohi=ya  lok-kin   tiw-šak-n̥onš                     
                                                                                    
               buggy-loc      get.in=and prairie-loc GO(PL)-3PLO-visit              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               iš-waŋ-ehe          n̥tan     tu-kemš-iš-waŋ-ehe                     
                                                                                    
               1PLSTATS-go.about-DUB be.or   boat-row-1PLSTATS-go.about-DUB         
                                                                                    
               ‘All day we might go about together beside the river, or get in a buggy and go
                                                                                    
               visit people on the prairie, or we might go about rowing in a boat.’ (1932:13:45-47)
                                                                                    
               [oˊk ‘nuˊxts aˊ’ntaˊnat ‘nhaˊh]                                      
                                                                                    
          461) ók n̥úhc á n̥tánat n̥háh                                             
                                                                                    
               ok   n̥-uhc         a    n̥tan-at  n̥-hah                            
                                                                                    
               come 2SSTATS-be.able Q   be.or-PRET 2SSTATS-be.not                   
                                                                                    
               ‘Are you able to come? Or are you not?’4 (1932:12:43)                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          If there is a stated contrast between the two sentences, the suffix -kšo is used. The only examples
                                                                                    
          of this suffix were obtained through elicitation.                         
                                                                                    
               [miˊlc kcoˊ yiˊlmāñ cokaˊx̥ kit]                                     
                                                                                    
          462) mílškšó yíl máŋ šokkákit                                             
                                                                                    
               ø-milš-kšo     yil  maŋ       ø-šok=ka-kit                           
                                                                                    
               3STATS-be.blind-BUT day be.long 3STATS-thing=do-PROG(SG)             
                                                                                    
               ‘He is blind, but he is doing things all throughout the day.’ (1932:72:2)
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         206                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [heˊ (k)co toˊlha]                                                   
                                                                                    
          463) hékšó tólháh                                                         
                                                                                    
               ø-he-kšo                      ø-tol-hah                              
                                                                                    
               3STATS-be.strong.tasting-BUT 3STATS-be.good-NEG                      
                                                                                    
               ‘It is strong-tasting, but not good.’ (1932:72:2)                    
                                                                                    
               [hicokēc kcoˊ yiˊlkit mōn tiˊco]                                     
                                                                                    
          464) hišoké·škšó yílkit mo·n tíšo                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               hi-šoke·š-kšo  yil-kit        mo·n tiš-o                             
                                                                                    
               1SSTATS-be.sick-BUT be.day-PROG(SG) all go-1SS                       
                                                                                    
               ‘I am sick, but I go out every day.’ (1932:156:1)                    
                                                                                    
               [icāk hiyaniaˊncoˊ tiwē tiˊco]                                       
                                                                                    
          465) išá·k hiyanyánkšó tiwé·tíšo                                          
                                                                                    
               iša·k     hi-yanyan-kšo  tiwé·-tiš-o                                 
                                                                                    
               person    1SSTATS-fear-BUT be.with-go-1SS                            
                                                                                    
               ‘I am afraid of the man, but I am going with him.’ (1932:29:1)       
                                                                                    
          If two verbs have the same subject and the actions are occurring at the same time, the first verb is
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          compounded with the second, to which all suffixes are attached.           
                                                                                    
               [Wi okēˊt māñ ilāñ-wāˊñtat]                                          
                                                                                    
          466) wi oké·t máŋ iláŋwáŋn̥ tat                                           
                                                                                    
               wi   oke·t     maŋ       ilaŋ-waŋ-n̥t-at                             
                                                                                    
               my   mother    long.time mourn-go.about CONTIN-PRET                  
                                                                                    
               ‘My mother kept on going about mourning for a long time.’ (1932:17:105)
                                                                                    
               [ha ˊcok’-okināˊtsne mōn hoktiwēˊ imōˊculat]                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         207                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          467) ha šokhokinácne mó·n hoktiwé·himó·šulat                              
                                                                                    
               ha   šokhokinacne mo·n hok-tiwe·-himo·š-ul-at                        
                                                                                    
               his  weapons   all  RECIP-be.together-bury-3PLS-PRET                 
                                                                                    
               ‘They buried all his weapons together with him.’ (1932:19:129-30)    
                                                                                    
          Independent conjunctions. There are independent conjunctions, but they are rare in the corpus.
                                                                                    
          The two most notable are káy ‘and then,’ and tik ‘until.’                 
                                                                                    
               [Kaˊ-i aˊn kaˊt-paˊ-ic naˊ-ulat haˊ aˊnkin kaˊ-u atkaˊki tiˊk imōˊctin Neˊ taˊmkin yaˊ]
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          468) káy aŋkát páyš náwulat ha áŋkin káw atkáki tikhimó·štin né·támkinya  
                                                                                    
               kay       aŋkat payš naw-ul-at     ha   aŋ-kin                       
                                                                                    
               and.then  door open leave-3PL-PRET his  house-LOC                    
                                                                                    
               ø-kaw          atkaki    tik  himo·š-ti-n    ne·tam-kin=ya           
                                                                                    
               3STATS-die(sg) since     until bury-PSTPROG-WHEN grave-LOC=and       
                                                                                    
               ‘And then they left the door open in his/her house from the time of his death
                                                                                    
               until they buried him/her in a grave, and…. (1932:18:122-24)         
                                                                                    
               [iti māˊñ hiwāˊlc tik yiˊlat]                                        
                                                                                    
          469) ití máŋ hi·wálš tik yílat                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ití  maŋ       hi-hiwalš      tik  yil-at                            
                                                                                    
               night be.long  1SSTATS-dream  until be.day-PRET                      
                                                                                    
               ‘I dreamed all night until it was day.’ (1932:43:1)                  
                                                                                    
          Omitted inflection in coordinate contexts. When two coordinated verbs in the desiderative,
                                                                                    
          and the preterite and dubitative modes share the same subject and aspect, one verb alone has the
                                                                                    
          subject and aspectual affixes.                                            
                                                                                    
               [kitsāk kaˊ-u yaˊ waˊñ-cakpaˊmkoh yaˊ cak’heˊ-uc]                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         208                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          470) kicá·k káwya wáŋšakpámkóhya šakhéwš (for wáŋšakhéwškóh)              
                                                                                    
               kica·k    ø-kaw=ya       waŋ-šak-pam-koh=ya       šak-hewš           
                                                                                    
               whiskey   3STATS-die(sg)=and go.about-3PLOBJ-beat-DESID=and 3PLOBJ-curse
                                                                                    
               ‘She got drunk and wanted to go about beating people and cursing them.’
                                                                                    
               (1932:15:79-80)                                                      
                                                                                    
               [Kaˊ-u oˊkin toˊkc ya imōˊculat]                                     
                                                                                    
          471) káw ókkin tókšya himó·šulat                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               kaw       ok-kin    tokš=ya        himo·š-ul-at                      
                                                                                    
               dead.person cloth-LOC wrap=and     bury-3PLS-PRET                    
                                                                                    
               ‘They wrapped the dead person in cloth and buried him/her.’ (1932:18:126)
                                                                                    
               [‘ntaˊn neˊc-paˊl idsonˊkin toˊ(h)i-a loˊx̥ kin tiˊu-sakioˊns icwāˊñĕhĕ]
                                                                                    
          472) n̥tán nešpalhicónkin tóhiya lókkin tiwšakn̥óns išwáŋehe              
                                                                                    
               n̥tan nešpalhicon-kin tohi=ya lok-kin   tiw-šak-n̥onš                
                                                                                    
               be.or buggy-loc     get.in=and prairie-loc GO(PL)-3PLO-visit         
                                                                                    
               iš-waŋ-ehe                                                           
                                                                                    
               1PLSTATS-go.about-DUB                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘Or we might get in a buggy and go visit people on the prairie’ (1932:13:45-46)
                                                                                    
               {kitsāk paihe-ushiámĕt}                                              
                                                                                    
          473) kicá·k payhewšhiámat                                                 
                                                                                    
               kicá·k    pay-hewš-hi-am-at                                          
                                                                                    
               whiskey   return-be.much-1sstats-drink-pret                          
                                                                                    
               ‘I drank too much whiskey.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:94)                     
                                                                                    
               {shul pakná-u tíkia pú’hhatipátsishat}                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         209                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          474) šúl paknáwtíkya púhhatipácišat                                       
                                                                                    
               šul  paknaw-tik=ya  puh-hatipaciš-ø-at                               
                                                                                    
               dog  run-go=and     jump(sg)-turn.somersault-3SS-PRET                
                                                                                    
               ‘The dog went running and jumped, turning a somersault.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:94)
                                                                                    
          However, in the case of non-third persons in the aorist mode, both verbs retain the subject affixes
                                                                                    
          if the verbs are transitive. If the verbs are intransitive, only the final verb of the sequence has the
                                                                                    
          subject affix.                                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Hiyeˊn teˊm nimaˊ-utsĕl yaˊ kuyak’hoˊ cakaˊtsel]                    
                                                                                    
          475) hiyén tém nimácelya kuyyatkól šakkácel                               
                                                                                    
               hiyen tem      nimá-cel=ya kuy-hat-kol       šak-ka-cel              
                                                                                    
               pig  yesterday kill-1pls=and intestine-REFLEX-stuff 3PLO-do-1PLS     
                                                                                    
               ‘Yesterday we killed a pig and made sausages.’ (1932:14:66-67)       
                                                                                    
               [yukiˊt iyiˊ yaˊ puhitsēˊctsĕl]                                      
                                                                                    
          476) yukít iyíya puhicéšcel                                               
                                                                                    
               yukit iyi=ya   puh-iceš-cel                                          
                                                                                    
               we   get.up=AND jump-go.over-1PLS                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘We get up and jump over it.’ (1932:107:2)                           
                                                                                    
          If an action is done to a body part, the possessive pronoun is not used, but the possessor is
                                                                                    
          understood from the affixes to the verb. This is a form of object possessor raising, which has
                                                                                    
          been documented in other languages of the Southeast (Munro, 1984; Martin, 1993).
                                                                                    
               [uˊts hatluˊticu]                                                    
                                                                                    
          477) úc hatlútišo                                                         
                                                                                    
               uc   hat-lutiš-o                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         210                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               nose REFLEX-blow-1SS                                                 
                                                                                    
               ‘I am blowing my nose.’ (1932:139:2)                                 
                                                                                    
               [uˊts (h)at’hoˊpco]                                                  
                                                                                    
          478) úc hathópšo                                                          
                                                                                    
               uc   hat-hopš-o                                                      
                                                                                    
               nose REFLEX-pierce-1SS                                               
                                                                                    
               ‘I am piercing my nose.’ (1932:139:2)                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [uˊts hipoˊckit]                                                     
                                                                                    
          479) úc hipóškkit                                                         
                                                                                    
               uc   hi-pošk-kit                                                     
                                                                                    
               nose 1SSTATS-bleed-PROG(SG)                                          
                                                                                    
               ‘My nose is bleeding.’ (1932:139:2)                                  
                                                                                    
               [tuˊts hatkoˊkico]                                                   
                                                                                    
          480) túc hatkókišo                                                        
                                                                                    
               tuc  hat-kokiš-o                                                     
                                                                                    
               leg  REFLEX-bend-1SS                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I am bending my leg.’ (1932:69:2)                                   
                                                                                    
               [ēˊñ hiwaˊhulat]                                                     
                                                                                    
          481) é·ŋ hiwáhu·lat                                                       
                                                                                    
               e·ŋ  hi-wahu-ul-at                                                   
                                                                                    
               name 1SO-call-3PLS-PRET                                              
                                                                                    
               ‘They called my name.’ (1932:31:1)                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         211                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Relative clause equivalents. Atakapa, like other Southeastern languages (Chickasaw, Munro,
                                                                                    
          2005:143-44; Chitimacha, Swadesh, 1946a:334; Creek, Hardy, 2005:237-8; Koasati,
                                                                                    
          Kimball,1991:525-27: Natchez, Kimball, 2005:444-45; Tunica, Haas, 1940:93), lacks
                                                                                    
          relativizing morphology; in fact, there are few examples of relative clause equivalents in the
                                                                                    
          corpus. In Atakapa, verbs of mental activity, such as hearing, seeing, thinking, believing, or
                                                                                    
          saying are followed directly by a complement clause which is an independent sentence with no
                                                                                    
          morphological connection to the verb, as mentioned above in the discussion of clausal
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          complements.                                                              
                                                                                    
               [Viˊvulat iˊcak capiˊx̥ k taneˊ-u okcak’hu-ulat]                     
                                                                                    
          482) wíwulat išà·k šappíhk tannéw okšakhúulat                             
                                                                                    
               wiw-ul-at      iša·k     šak-pihk  tan-hew                           
                                                                                    
               believe-3PLS-PRET person PL-die(pl) other-PL                         
                                                                                    
               ok-šak-hu-ul-at                                                      
                                                                                    
               come-3PLO-see-3PLS-PRET                                              
                                                                                    
               ‘They believed that other dead people came to see them,’ lit. ‘They believed it; other
                                                                                    
               dead people came to see them.’ (1932:18:121-22)                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [ca cokeˊc tiˊxt wi hiˊnai]                                          
                                                                                    
          483) ša šoké·š tíht wí hinày                                              
                                                                                    
               ša        šoke·š    tiht      wi   hi-nay                            
                                                                                    
               someone   sick      lie(sg)   I    1SSTATS-think                     
                                                                                    
               ‘I think that someone is lying sick,’ lit. ‘I think it; someone is lying sick.’ (1932:38:1)
                                                                                    
          Other relative clause equivalents are formed by nominalizing a sentence using the gerund suffix
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         212                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          -ne, and with the appropriate case marker on the nominalized sentence, depending on whether
                                                                                    
          the sentence is the subject, the object, or in a locative relationship with the main clause. Only
                                                                                    
          relative clause equivalents in object and locative relationships are found in the data.
                                                                                    
               [wi hitēt hioˊknă oˊñc]                                              
                                                                                    
          484) wi ité·t hiókne óŋš                                                  
                                                                                    
               wi   ite·t hi-ok-ne      ø-oŋš                                       
                                                                                    
               my   father 1SSTATS-come-GER 3STATS-not.want                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘My father does not want me to come, lit. my father does not want it that I come.’
                                                                                    
               (1932:43:1)                                                          
                                                                                    
               [Yiˊl paˊxĕ ‘nyaˊ-uta ‘noˊkne]                                       
                                                                                    
          485) yíl páhw n̥yáwta n̥ókne                                              
                                                                                    
               yil  pahw      n̥-yaw-ta           n̥-ok-ne                          
                                                                                    
               day  seven     2SOBJ-wait.for-PCPL 2SSTATS-come-GER                  
                                                                                    
               ‘I am to wait seven days for you to come, lit. I am to wait for you seven days that you
                                                                                    
               come.’ (1932:12:42)                                                  
                                                                                    
          There is a single example of such a relative clause equivalent in a locative relationship:
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [nuˊnkin toˊhulat kakauˊ iyeˊtsnē ûˊt]                               
                                                                                    
          486) núŋkin tóhulat kakáw iyécneot                                        
                                                                                    
               nuŋ-kin   toh-ul-at      kakaw     iyec-ne-ot                        
                                                                                    
               village-LOC dwell-3PLS-PRET sun    rise-GER-DIR                      
                                                                                    
               ‘They lived in villages towards where the sun rises.’ (1932:10:31)   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         213                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Here the main clause is núŋkin tóhulat ‘they lived in villages.’ The dependent clause is kakáw
                                                                                    
          iyéc ‘the sun rises.’ The latter is nominalized with the gerund suffix -ne, and related to the main
                                                                                    
          clause with the directional case ending -ot, thus creating a locative relative clause equivalent.
                                                                                    
           There is one further probable example of a relative clause equivalent.   
                                                                                    
               [Icāk tsanuˊki iˊñi caknaˊ-uc iyaˊnĕk mōn ‘nkaˊnē]                   
                                                                                    
          487) icá·k canúkkin <šak>íŋi šaknáwš iyáŋik mò·n n̥ káne                  
                                                                                    
               ica·k     canuk-kin <šak>-iŋi      šak-nawš-ø                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               person    horse-LOC 3PLO-look.for  3PLO-let-2SIMP                    
                                                                                    
               iyaŋ-ik        mò·n      n̥-ka-ne                                    
                                                                                    
               there-ERG.AGNT be.all    2SS-do-GER                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘Let people on horses look <for them>! That there is all that you do.’ (1932:13:59-60)
                                                                                    
          This example is from a text, that based on several factors, one of which is the lack of the third
                                                                                    
          person plural object pronoun on the verb íŋi ‘to look for,’ seems to have been a direct translation
                                                                                    
          of a prepared English original. In the publication (1932:13-14) the phrase iyáŋik mò·n nkáne is
                                                                                    
          not even translated except in the interlinear format, where it appears as: “that is all for you to
                                                                                    
          do.” If this is not a case of the gerund expressing purpose, then the unique ergative form of the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          noun iyáŋ ‘there’ acts as a resumptive pronoun referring to the the previous sentence, the noun
                                                                                    
          mo·n is verbalized as ‘to be all,’ and n̥káne, as a noun in the absolutive state, is the relative clause
                                                                                    
          equivalent meaning ‘that you do.’                                         
                                                                                    
          Interrogative sentences. The particle á placed after the verb of a sentence indicates that it is a
                                                                                    
          question. There is also a less common final suffix -n (á) that occasionally indicates questions, as
                                                                                    
          in examples 489 and 496.                                                  
                                                                                    
               [‘ntoˊl aˊ]                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         214                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          488) n̥tól á                                                              
                                                                                    
               n̥-tol         a                                                     
                                                                                    
               2SSTATS-be.good Q                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘Are you well?’ (1932:23:1)                                          
                                                                                    
               [‘n hihu haˊxc aˊ]                                                   
                                                                                    
          489) n̥hihúháhš á                                                         
                                                                                    
               n̥-hi-hu-hahš       a                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               2SSTATS-1SO-see-NEG Q                                                
                                                                                    
               ‘Do you not see me?’ (1932:34:1)                                     
                                                                                    
               [‘nhiiˊnat hatnaˊxka paˊ-ihiticnăna]                                 
                                                                                    
          490) n̥hiínat hatnáhka payhitìšnen á                                      
                                                                                    
               n̥-hi-in-at         hatnah-ka      pay-hi-tiš-ne-n                   
                                                                                    
               a                                                                    
                                                                                    
               2SSTATS-1SO-ask-PRET so.much-ADV   BACK-1SSTATS-go(sg)-GER-Q         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Q                                                                    
               ‘You asked for me; how am I to go back?’ (1932:37:1)                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Interrogative words do not form a single class. The concept ‘who’ is handled using ša,
                                                                                    
          ‘someone,’ followed by the interrogative particle, and the concept ‘what’ is expressed by šok,
                                                                                    
          ‘something,’ followed by the interrogative particle. There is a rare pronoun šinnéw (šin- + -héw
                                                                                    
          pl.) which means ‘who? (pl).’                                             
                                                                                    
               [haˊ ca aˊ]                                                          
                                                                                    
          491) há ša á                                                              
                                                                                    
               ha   ša        a                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         215                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               he   someone   Q                                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘Who is he?’ (1932:108:1)                                            
                                                                                    
               [caˊ aˊ nāˊc]                                                        
                                                                                    
          492) šá á ná·š                                                            
                                                                                    
               ša        a    na-iš                                                 
                                                                                    
               someone   Q    you-FOC                                               
                                                                                    
               ‘Who are you?’ (1932:108:1)                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [cok ‘nkaˊ a]                                                        
                                                                                    
          493) šók n̥ká á                                                           
                                                                                    
               šok       n̥-ka     a                                                
                                                                                    
               something 2SSTATS-do Q                                               
                                                                                    
               ‘What are you doing?’ (1932:56:1)                                    
                                                                                    
               {shók na komhópshkin nkéa}                                           
                                                                                    
          494) šók na komhópškin n̥ké á                                             
                                                                                    
               šok       na   komhopš-kin n̥-ke        a                            
                                                                                    
               something your pocket-LOC 2SSTATS-have  Q                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘What do you have in your pocket?’ (Gatschet 1885b:79)               
                                                                                    
               [hakiˊt cineˊv aˊ]                                                   
                                                                                    
          495) hakít šinnéw á                                                       
                                                                                    
               hakit     šin-hew   a                                                
                                                                                    
               they      who-PL    Q                                                
                                                                                    
               ‘Who are they?’ (1932:23:1)                                          
                                                                                    
               [cineˊ-u yaˊ cukcakiˊkc]                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         216                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          496) šinnéw yá šokšakyíkš                                                 
                                                                                    
               šin-hew   ya   šok-šak-yikš                                          
                                                                                    
               who-PL    that STH-3PLO-sell                                         
                                                                                    
               ‘Who are those merchants?’ (1932:155:2)                              
                                                                                    
          The concept of ‘where’ is usually handled by the noun itáŋ ‘place;’ note itáŋ mo·n ‘everywhere.’
                                                                                    
               [it’haˊñ ike ok’n]                                                   
                                                                                    
          497) itáŋike ókn̥                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               itaŋ-ike  ok-ø-n̥                                                    
                                                                                    
               place-EL  come-3SS-Q                                                 
                                                                                    
               ‘Where does he come from?’ (1932:53:2)                               
                                                                                    
               [cul itaˊñ aˊ]                                                       
                                                                                    
          498) šúl itáŋ á                                                           
                                                                                    
               šul  itaŋ a                                                          
                                                                                    
               dog  place Q                                                         
                                                                                    
               ‘Where is the dog?’ (1932:53:2)                                      
                                                                                    
               {ná ná-u itháng ná-i? áng katmókin náyu}                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          499) na náw itáŋ náy? áŋkatmókkin náyo                                    
                                                                                    
               na   naw  itaŋ nay? aŋkat-mok-kin  nay-o                             
                                                                                    
               you  shoe place put door-short-LOC put-1SS                           
                                                                                    
               ‘Where did you put the shoes? I put them in the window.’ (Gatschet, 1885c:86)
                                                                                    
           In addition to this form there is the sentence-final particle má which means ‘where is?’
                                                                                    
               [ciwoˊn ma]                                                          
                                                                                    
          500) šiwán má                                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         217                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               šiwan ma                                                             
                                                                                    
               cat  where.is                                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘Where is the cat?’ (1932:112:2)                                     
                                                                                    
               [naˊ noˊmc ma]                                                       
                                                                                    
          501) na nómš má                                                           
                                                                                    
               na   nomš ma                                                         
                                                                                    
               your child where.is                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘Where is your child?’ (1932:83:1)                                   
                                                                                    
           Of interest is the fact that this particle and the construction in which it is used was borrowed
                                                                                    
          into Koasati, a Muskogean language spoken upstream of the Atakapa on the Calcasieu River
                                                                                    
          (Kimball, 1994:132).                                                      
                                                                                    
            The adjective hatnáh ‘so much’ in an interrogative sentence means ‘how much?’; converted
                                                                                    
          into an adverb with the suffix -ka, hatnáhka, it means ‘how?’             
                                                                                    
               [laklaˊx̥ c hatnaˊ nkeˊa]                                            
                                                                                    
          502) laklákš hatnáh n̥ké á                                                
                                                                                    
               laklakš   hatnah    n̥-ke          a                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               money     so.much   2SSTATS-have   Q                                 
                                                                                    
               ‘How much money do you have?’ (1932:37:1)                            
                                                                                    
               [hatnaˊ hiyiˊkicta]                                                  
                                                                                    
          503) hatnáh hiyikištá                                                     
                                                                                    
               hatnah    hi-yikiš-ta                                                
                                                                                    
               so.much   1SO-pay-PCPL                                               
                                                                                    
               ‘How much am I to be paid?’ (1932:37:1)                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         218                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [hatnaˊka peˊl a]                                                    
                                                                                    
          504) hatnáhka pél á                                                       
                                                                                    
               hatnah-ka      ø-pel          a                                      
                                                                                    
               so.much-ADV    3STATS-be.far  Q                                      
                                                                                    
               ‘How far is it?’ (1932:37:1)                                         
                                                                                    
               [hatnaˊx̥ kan mēˊts a]                                               
                                                                                    
          505) hatnáhka n̥méc á                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               hatnah-ka      n̥-mec         a                                      
                                                                                    
               so.much-ADV    2STATS-be.tall Q                                      
                                                                                    
               ‘How tall are you?’ (1932:37:1)                                      
                                                                                    
          There is a further question word listed in the dictionary, šókay ‘why?’. The questioned sentence
                                                                                    
          needs to be followed by the question suffix –n, or the question particle á. There are only two
                                                                                    
          examples given.                                                           
                                                                                    
               [coˊkaya]                                                            
                                                                                    
          506) šókay á                                                              
                                                                                    
               šokay a                                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               why  Q                                                               
                                                                                    
               ‘Why?’ (1932:113:2)                                                  
                                                                                    
               [coˊka-i ‘n-oˊt haˊxcnan]                                            
                                                                                    
          507) šókay n̥ókháhšnen                                                    
                                                                                    
               šokay n̥-ok-hahš-ne-n                                                
                                                                                    
               why  2SSTATS-come-NEG-GER-Q                                          
                                                                                    
               ‘Why do you not come?’ (1932:113:2)                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         219                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Idiomatic expressions. Atakapa has a number of individual idiomatic expressions. Several are
                                                                                    
          built around the verb pair káw / píhk ‘to die.’ In these expressions the subject is always
                                                                                    
          expressed by a stative prefix.                                            
                                                                                    
               kicáˑk káw / kicáˑk píhk ‘to be drunk’                               
                                                                                    
               kicá·k amkáw             ‘to be drunk’                               
                                                                                    
               kawkáw káw / kawkáw píhk ‘to be thirsty’                             
                                                                                    
               óˑl káw                  ‘to be hungry’                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [kitsāk kaˊ-u yaˊ waˊñ-cakpaˊmkoh yaˊ cak’heˊ-uc]                    
                                                                                    
          508) kicá·k káwya wáŋšakpámkóhya šakhéwš                                  
                                                                                    
               kica·k    ø-kaw=ya            waŋ-šak-ø-pam-koh=ya                   
                                                                                    
               whiskey   3SSTATS-die(sg)=and go.about-3PLOBJ-3STATS-beat-DESID=and  
                                                                                    
               šak-hewš                                                             
                                                                                    
               3PLOBJ-curse                                                         
                                                                                    
               ‘She got drunk and wanted to go about beating people and cursing them.’
                                                                                    
               (1932:15:79-80)                                                      
                                                                                    
               [Kitsāˊk cakpiˊx̥ k yaˊ paˊm (h)okpaˊmiculat]                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          509) kicá·k šappíhkya pámhokpámišulat                                     
                                                                                    
               kica·k    šak-pihk-ya         pam,hok,pam-iš-ul-at                   
                                                                                    
               whiskey   3PLSTATS-die(pl)-and REDUP,RECIP,beat-CAUS-3PLS-PRET       
                                                                                    
               ‘They were drunk and they really beat each other up.’ (1932:20:145)  
                                                                                    
               {nûng-úship shokó-i kitsā́k ámkawět}                                 
                                                                                    
          510) núŋúšip šokóy kicá·k ámkawat                                         
                                                                                    
               nuŋuš-ip  šokoy kica·k   am-ø-kaw-at                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         220                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               city-INESS chief whiskey drink-3STATS-die-PRET                       
                                                                                    
               ‘The judge was drunk.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:86)                          
                                                                                    
               [kaukaˊ-u hikaˊ-u haˊ]                                               
                                                                                    
          511) kawkáw hikáwháh                                                      
                                                                                    
               kawkaw    hi-kaw-háh                                                 
                                                                                    
               water     1SSTATS-die(sg)-NEG                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘I am not thirsty.’ (1932:60:2)                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [kaukau na piˊx̥ ka]                                                 
                                                                                    
          512) kawkáw nappíhk á                                                     
                                                                                    
               kawkaw    nak-pihk       a                                           
                                                                                    
               water     2PLSSTATS-die(pl) Q                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘Are you all thirsty?’ (1932:82:2)                                   
                                                                                    
               [ōlhikaˊ-u haˊ]                                                      
                                                                                    
          513) ó·l hikáwháh                                                         
                                                                                    
               o·l  hi-kaw-hah                                                      
                                                                                    
               hunger    1SSTATS-die(sg)-NEG                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘I am not hungry.’ (1932:60:2)                                       
                                                                                    
          There are two idioms used to describe the behavior of lightning. Rather than using the usual
                                                                                    
          word for lightning, yimyílš, the word lóŋloŋš ‘thunder’ is used. The verb yimyílš, ‘for lightning
                                                                                    
          to occur,’ is only used of the flash. Lightning is said to fall to the ground, and not to strike, but
                                                                                    
          to seize an object:                                                       
                                                                                    
               [loˊñloñc (neˊkin) makauˊ]                                           
                                                                                    
          514) lóŋloŋš né·kin makáw                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         221                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               loŋloŋš   ne·-kin   ø-makaw                                          
                                                                                    
               thunder   ground-LOC 3STATS-fall                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘Lightning strikes the ground,’ lit. ‘Thunder falls to the ground.’ (1932:77:2)
                                                                                    
               [loˊñloñc anˊ koˊñět]                                                
                                                                                    
          515) lóŋloŋš áŋ kóŋat                                                     
                                                                                    
               loŋloŋš   aŋ   koŋ-ø-at                                              
                                                                                    
               thunder   house strike-3SS-PRET                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘Lightning struck the house,’ lit. ‘Thunder seized the house.’ (1932:77:2)
                                                                                    
          The adverb tíwhc, which usually indicates that a weather phenomenon is taking place gradually
                                                                                    
          or gently, is used in three idioms, one with the verb wáŋ ‘to go about,’ the other two with the
                                                                                    
          verb ké·t ‘to sit.’                                                       
                                                                                    
               [tiuxts waˊnkit]                                                     
                                                                                    
          516) tíwhc wáŋkit                                                         
                                                                                    
               tiwhc ø-waŋ-kit                                                      
                                                                                    
               gently 3STATS-go.about-prog(sg)                                      
                                                                                    
               ‘He is behaving.’ (1932:142:1)                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [tiˊuxts kēt iaˊ-uc]                                                 
                                                                                    
          517) tíwhc ké·t hiáwš                                                     
                                                                                    
               tiwhc     ke·t hi-awš                                                
                                                                                    
               gently    sit  1SSTATS-be.unable                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘I am restless.’ (1932:34:2)                                         
                                                                                    
               [wi tiˊuxts keˊt’nto]                                                
                                                                                    
          518) wi tíwhc ké·tn̥to                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         222                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               wi   tiwhc 5   ke·t-n̥t-o·                                           
                                                                                    
               I    gently    sit-CONTIN-PHR.TERM                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘I am going to sit quietly.’ (1932:62:2)                             
                                                                                    
          Two idioms are based on the reflexive form of the verb ‘to see’ hu. The first is based on the
                                                                                    
          simple reflexive.                                                         
                                                                                    
               [toˊlka at’huˊ]                                                      
                                                                                    
          519) tólka hathú                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               tolka hat-hu-ø                                                       
                                                                                    
               well REFLEX-see-2SIMP                                                
                                                                                    
               ‘Be careful!’ (1932:135:1)                                           
                                                                                    
          The other idiom compounds the reflexive of hu with the verb wáŋ, ‘to go about.’
                                                                                    
               [toˊlka hat’huˊ waˊñ]                                                
                                                                                    
          520) tólka hathúwáŋ                                                       
                                                                                    
               tolka hat-hu-waŋ                                                     
                                                                                    
               well REFLEX-see-go.about                                             
                                                                                    
               ‘He takes care of himself.’ (1932:135:1)                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Diseases either ‘do’ a person (ká ) or ‘have’ a person (ké ).             
                                                                                    
               [cok’hēˊc oktanuˊk cokaˊat]                                          
                                                                                    
          521) šoké·š hoktanúk šakkáat                                              
                                                                                    
               šoke·š    hoktanuk  šak-ka-ø-at                                      
                                                                                    
               illness   different 3PLO-do-3S-pret                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘They had different illnesses, lit. Different illnesses did them.’ (1932:15:91-92)
                                                                                    
               [Haˊ hilaˊ-i cok’hēˊc yaˊ kaˊ-u haˊnĕt Koyiˊu hiweˊ-u keˊat]         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         223                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          522) ha hiláy šoké·šya káwhánat koyíw hiwéw kéat                          
                                                                                    
               ha   hilay šoke·š=ya ø-kaw-han-at       koyíw hiwéw                  
                                                                                    
               his  wife be.sick=and 3STATS-die(sg)-ALMOST cold strong              
                                                                                    
               ø-ke-at                                                              
                                                                                    
               3STATS-have-PRET                                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘His wife was sick and almost died. A strong cold had her.’ (1932:13:54-55)
                                                                                    
           To express the concept ‘some…others…’ Atakapa uses the construction tannéw…tannéw…
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Taneˊ-u tuˊlkin paˊk-cakpaˊkicat. Taneˊ-u kaukauˊkin puˊm-hik’huˊlculat]
                                                                                    
          523) tannéw túlkin pákšakpákišat; tannéw kawkáwkin púmhikihólšulat        
                                                                                    
               tan-hew   tul-kin   pak,šak,pak-iš-at        tan-hew                 
                                                                                    
               some-PL   lake-loc  REDUP,3PLOBJ,throw.in-CAUS-PRET some-PL          
                                                                                    
               kawkaw-kin pum-hik-holš-ul-at                                        
                                                                                    
               water-LOC jump-LOC-put.in-3PLS-PRET                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘Some of them they threw again and again into the lake; others went and jumped
                                                                                    
               into the water.’ (1932:20:146-47)                                    
                                                                                    
          The language has developed an idiom to express the concept of washing something for someone,
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          using a double-verb construction with pác ‘to wash something,’ and míš ‘to give something to
                                                                                    
          someone.’                                                                 
                                                                                    
               {okotká-ush íshak’hé-u shakshopātshimíshinto}                        
                                                                                    
          524) okotkáwš išà·khéw šakšokpáchimíšn̥to                                 
                                                                                    
               okotkawš  iša·k-hew šak-šok-pac-hi-miš-n̥t-o·                        
                                                                                    
               shirt     person-PL 3PLO-STH-wash-1SSTATS-give-CONTIN-PHR.TERM       
                                                                                    
               ‘I am going to wash shirts for people.’ (Gatschet 1885b, 62)         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         224                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Temporal expressions show that the Atakapa had a spatial perception of time, with the past being
                                                                                    
          perceived as being in front of a person, and the future perceived as being behind. In other
                                                                                    
          languages with similar spatial orientation of time, the past is in front because it is something that
                                                                                    
          is known, i.e. seen, while the future is behind because it is unknown and cannot be seen.
                                                                                    
               [iˊti iluˊ]                                                          
                                                                                    
          525) íti ilú                                                              
                                                                                    
               íti       ilu                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               in.front  year                                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘last year’ (1932:52:2)                                              
                                                                                    
               [haˊl itiyiˊlc]                                                      
                                                                                    
          526) hál itiyílš                                                          
                                                                                    
               hal       itiyílš                                                    
                                                                                    
               in.back   month                                                      
                                                                                    
               ‘next month’ (1932:155:2)                                            
                                                                                    
          One expression is a loan translation from French, Il a une bonne tête.    
                                                                                    
               {ishát tól kē}                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          527) icáˑt tól ké                                                         
                                                                                    
               icáˑt tól ø-ké                                                       
                                                                                    
               head good 3sstats-have                                               
                                                                                    
               ‘He is intelligent.’ French: (Gatschet 1885b:57)                     
                                                                                    
          There is also an expression that is a loan translation from English, using the verb páłi, which
                                                                                    
          usually means ‘to split; to break,’ in the sense ‘to break out of something.’
                                                                                    
               {ánlā́k pá‘li yantá-ulĕt}                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         225                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          528) áŋlá·k páłiya n̥táhulat                                              
                                                                                    
               áŋlá·k páłi=ya n̥táh-ul-at                                           
                                                                                    
               jail break=and escape-3PLS-PRET                                      
                                                                                    
               ‘They broke out of jail and escaped.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:105)          
                                                                                    
          Areal comparisons. The three Atakapan languages, Yukhíti, Hiyékiti, and Orkokisak, form a
                                                                                    
          small family that seems to be unrelated to any other language or group. There have been
                                                                                    
          attempts to relate Atakapa to Chitimacha, the language isolate bordering Hiyékiti to the east,
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          from the time of Albert S. Gatschet (1885b:177-178). In 1919, John R. Swanton published a
                                                                                    
          comparison of Atakapa, Chitimacha, and Tunica in an attempt to show that they were related
                                                                                    
          languages. Morris Swadesh limited the comparison to Atakapa and Chitimacha (1946b; 1947),
                                                                                    
          while Heinz-Karl Gursky (1965; 1969) expanded the comparison to include Tunica. Mary R.
                                                                                    
          Haas included Atakapa in her Gulf hypothesis (1951; 1952; 1958); this was accepted by Pamela
                                                                                    
          Munro in her exploration of the possible relationship between Gulf and the Yukian languages
                                                                                    
          (1994). However, these proposals have been seriously questioned (Campbell, 1997:305-6;
                                                                                    
          Mithun, 2001:302; 2017:215).                                              
                                                                                    
               I have pointed out elsewhere that there are certain structural similarities to Chitimacha,
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          including the facts that both languages are ergative-absolutive and Atakapa verb plurals in -m are
                                                                                    
          strikingly similar to Chitimacha verb plurals in -ma. There are also some vocabulary items that
                                                                                    
          show a great deal of similarity, as has long been noted, such as Atakapa né· ‘land, Chitimacha
                                                                                    
          neyˀ, Atakapa kíš (sg) 'woman,’ kéš (pl), Chitimacha kiča (sg) / kič (pl), Atakapa áŋ ‘house,’
                                                                                    
          Chitimacha hana. Nonetheless, such similarities are very rare, and there seem to be no regular
                                                                                    
          sound correspondences such as exist between the three Atakapan languages. 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         226                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               One linguistic parallel between Atakapa and Chitimacha that has not yet been discussed
                                                                                    
          is the use of the focus suffix. In both Atakapa and Chitimacha, the suffix has the form -š, and is
                                                                                    
          attached to nouns and pronouns. In Chitimacha the suffix -š can be used on a verbal form if
                                                                                    
          there is no nominal form in the sentence, as well as on sentence-initial conjunctions. Compare
                                                                                    
          the following Chitimacha example, which is from the beginning of the story, A Long-Nosed
                                                                                    
          Monster Tries to Eat a Woman (Swadesh, 1950:A.32.a).6                     
                                                                                    
          kunukˀu kičantˀa-š haksikˀam hi wa·čtiʔi                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          wetk we haksikˀam kap ʔu·kičˀiwkˀ-š                                       
                                                                                    
          wetk-š ʔaštkankiš we haksikˀam-š kun ni čˀamtink ču·ši                    
                                                                                    
          wetk we kičantˀa-š kap ʔu·kičˀiwšin                                       
                                                                                    
          kun hus ʔaši-š ni čˀamtink hup hi čuyi                                    
                                                                                    
          It is said that an old woman married a young man.                         
                                                                                    
          And then, she was jealous of the young man.                               
                                                                                    
          And also, sometimes the young man, it is said, used to go to dances.      
                                                                                    
          And then, the old woman used to be jealous of him.                        
                                                                                    
          It is said that her husband went to where there was a dance.              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                Because the main topic of the story is the old woman, in the first sentence kičantˀa is
                                                                                    
          marked with the focus suffix. Although the noun for young man, haksikˀam, is mentioned again
                                                                                    
          in the second sentence, and made definite with the article we, the focus is still on the old woman,
                                                                                    
          and since there is no nominal adjunct in the sentence that refers to her, the focus suffix is added
                                                                                    
          to the verbal form kap ʔu·kičˀiwkˀ ‘she was jealous of him.’ In the next sentence, the initial
                                                                                    
          sentence adverb wetk is marked with the focus suffix to show that there is a change of focus
                                                                                    
          from the old woman, and the noun haksikˀam ‘young man’ has the focus suffix to show that he is
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         227                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          now the center of attention. In the fourth sentence, the focus once again is on the actions of the
                                                                                    
          old woman, and since there is an overt nominal subject of the verb kap ʔu·kičˀiwšin ‘she used to
                                                                                    
          be jealous of him,’ that noun, kičantˀa, has the focus suffix. Finally, in the fifth sentence,
                                                                                    
          attention shifts again to the actions of the young man, so the word ʔaši ‘man, husband’ is marked
                                                                                    
          with the focus suffix.                                                    
                                                                                    
               It is interesting to note that the usage of the focus morpheme in Chitimacha is parallel to
                                                                                    
          that of the Atakapa focus morpheme, as well as having the same phonemic form. If an off-hand
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          remark by Swanton is correct (1907b:277-78), that the Atakapa and Chitimacha shared stories, it
                                                                                    
          suggests that there may have been a long period of Atakapa-Chitimacha bilingualism.
                                                                                    
               Caddo, the language spoken to the north of Atakapa, is structurally very different, being a
                                                                                    
          classic example of a polysynthetic language, as opposed to Atakapa, whose morphology is
                                                                                    
          primary agglutinative. The only striking vocabulary similarity is Yukhíti kawkáw, Orkokisak
                                                                                    
          koko, ‘water,’ Caddo kú:kuʔ. In the past it has been suggested that this word is a loan from
                                                                                    
          Atakapa into Caddo; however this is implausible, given that the Caddo were an advanced
                                                                                    
          Mississippian society, and the Atakapa were hunter-gatherers. The fact that there is another
                                                                                    
          word in the Atakapan languages, Hiyékiti ak ‘water,’ Yukhíti á·k ‘liquid,’ suggests that the loan
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          came the other way.                                                       
                                                                                    
               To the west, northwest, and southwest of the Atakapa in Texas were many peoples, but
                                                                                    
          for the most part the languages they spoke (such as Adai, Bidai, and Karankawa) are poorly
                                                                                    
          attested. The one well-described language that was spoken in eastern Texas is Tonkawa, and
                                                                                    
          there are some structural similarities between the two languages. Tonkawa has an infinitive
                                                                                    
          suffix -n, which also derives nouns from verbs, for example xana-n ‘to drink,’ (Hoijer 1933:99),
                                                                                    
          xa·lo-hanan ‘drinking cup’ (Hoijer, 1949:60); cf. Atakapa ám-ne ‘to drink,’ ámne ‘a drink.’ In
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         228                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Tonkawa there is a suffix -ʔen which is only used to conjoin nouns (Hoijer, 1933:117), and is
                                                                                    
          comparable to the Atakapa clitic =n, which also is only used to conjoin nouns.
                                                                                    
          TONKAWA                                                                   
                                                                                    
          528a) heykʷecan-ʔen heyxaxalˀan-ʔen heynenwan-ʔen                         
                                                                                    
               ring-and       earring-and    red.paint-and                          
                                                                                    
               ‘Rings and earrings and red paint, and…’ (Hoijer:1933:117)           
                                                                                    
          ATAKAPA                                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          528b) {nē n’itans’n icāk’n mōni}                                          
                                                                                    
               né·n̥ itánšn̥ išá·kn̥ mó·ni                                          
                                                                                    
               ne·=n̥    itanš=n̥       iša·k=n̥  mo·ni                             
                                                                                    
               earth=and sky/cloud=and  person=and all(animate)                     
                                                                                    
               ‘The earth and sky and people and all living things.’ (Gatschet, 1885b:87)
                                                                                    
          Both languages are fluid-s languages, as shown by the following examples: 
                                                                                    
          TONKAWA                                                                   
                                                                                    
          529a) mˀe·ycoʔs               529b) kemˀe·ycoʔ                            
                                                                                    
          `    mˀe·yc-o-ʔ-s                  ke-mˀe·yc-o-ʔ-ø                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               urinate-DECL-PRES-1S          1SSTATS-urinate-DECL-PRES-3S           
                                                                                    
               ‘I urinate.’                  ‘I urinate involuntarily.’             
                                                                                    
                                             (Hoijer, 1933:70)                      
                                                                                    
          ATAKAPA                                                                   
                                                                                    
          530a) [hatkaˊuco]             530b) {hiatká-ushat}                        
                                                                                    
               hatkáwšo                      hihatkáwšat                            
                                                                                    
               hat-kawš-o                    hi-hat-kawš-at                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         229                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               REFLEX-prick-1SS              1SSTATS-REFLEX-prick-PRET              
                                                                                    
               ‘I pricked myself on purpose.’ ‘I accidentally pricked myself.’      
                                                                                    
               (1932:61:2)                   (Gatschet, 1885b:63)                   
                                                                                    
          In compound verbs with a non-third-person object, the object person prefix occurs between the
                                                                                    
          two parts of the compound in both languages:                              
                                                                                    
          TONKAWA                                                                   
                                                                                    
          531) nackexispoʔ                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               nac-ke-xisp-o-ʔ-ø                                                    
                                                                                    
               bite-1SOBJ-cut.sinew DECL-PRES-3S                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘He bites me, cutting a sinew.’ (Hoijer, 1933:56)                    
                                                                                    
          ATAKAPA                                                                   
                                                                                    
               [wi cocoˊlc hinteˊhi hăˊnulet]                                       
                                                                                    
          532) wi šošólšhin̥téhihánulat                                             
                                                                                    
               wi   šošolš-hi-n̥tehi-han-ul-at                                      
                                                                                    
               I    scare(sg)-1SOBJ-frighten-ALMOST-3PLS-PRET                       
                                                                                    
               ‘They scared and almost frightened me.’ (1932:93:2)                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Despite these structural parallels, there is almost no comparable vocabulary between Atakapa
                                                                                    
          and Tonkawa. The most notable is Atakapa yáh ‘to eat,’ Tonkawa yaxa, but given the lack of
                                                                                    
          other lexical similarities, this resemblance is likely a chance one.      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Notes                                                                     
                                                                                    
          1 . There are two examples of the ergative case being used with transitive verbs where the direct
                                                                                    
          object is not understood to be a human being. These are examples 371 and 373 above. In both
                                                                                    
          cases the object is indefinite, yá·š ‘that’ in 371, and covert in the verb yílš ‘to write’ in 373. That
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         230                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          there is an object in 373 is shown by the fact that most of the examples of the verb ‘to write’ are
                                                                                    
          in the form sokyílš, with the incorporated noun šok making the verb intransitive (or antipassive).
                                                                                    
          Both of these examples are also unique because the A role is filled by a second person singular
                                                                                    
          pronoun. There might be different rules for the use of the ergative case with second person
                                                                                    
          agents, or they may reflect an earlier stage of the language when the ergative case was used with
                                                                                    
          a broader group of semantic types.                                        
                                                                                    
          2 . Gatschet’s original is preferred to the one found in the publication (1932:612) because
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Swanton did not include the gloss ‘accidentally,’ which is found in the field notes. In Swanton’s
                                                                                    
          defense, when Gatschet went over his field notes with Tottokš, he had made some bad mistakes
                                                                                    
          in segmentation at this point, and when he corrected these in red, he either underlined or crossed
                                                                                    
          out the word ‘accidentally,’ and Swanton took it as a deletion.           
                                                                                    
          3 . The second half of the phrase is a gapped construction, with n̥háh ‘you are not,’ replacing the
                                                                                    
          expected ók n̥ úhcháh á. ‘Are you not able to come?’                      
                                                                                    
          4 . As discussed above, the participle in –ta is unmarked for subject. A first-person singular
                                                                                    
          subject is assumed because example 439 follows 438 immediately in the field notes.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          5. The meaning of the adverb tíwhc is confirmed by a variation on this sentence which replaces
                                                                                    
          the adverb with the verb hateláŋš ‘to be still; be quiet.’                
                                                                                    
          6. Swadesh did not recognize the discourse functions of the suffix -š in Chitimacha, saying,
                                                                                    
          “(p)erhaps to be included here is a postposition -š which is quite common at the end of phrases,
                                                                                    
          but which seems to have no meaning at all.” (1946a:329).                  
                                                                                    
          <Insert Illustration 2 after this page, facing the first page of Chapter 5>
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         231                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          5. TEXTS                                                                  
                                                                                    
          Introduction. English literary style, in fact European literary style in general, consists of
                                                                                    
          sentences gathered together into paragraphs. We have tended to treat Native American texts as
                                                                                    
          though they were structured in the same way. Languages in the Southeastern United States,
                                                                                    
          however, have their own unique literary style (see Kimball, 2010 for Koasati stylistics, and
                                                                                    
          Kimball 2013 for Natchez stylistics). The first stylistic criterion is that a text is made up of short
                                                                                    
          phrases, which can be termed lines or verses. The second criterion is that an idea can be stated,
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          and then restated with an augmentation of meaning. A third criterion is that a long text can be
                                                                                    
          divided into scenes, which contain lines grouped semantically. A fourth criterion is the use of
                                                                                    
          the number four in grouping lines or concepts in a text. Using the Southeastern stylistic criteria
                                                                                    
          makes translating an Atakapa text much simpler.                           
                                                                                    
           The texts here and in the publication are given in the order that Gatschet took them down in his
                                                                                    
          field notes. The texts that Kišyuc told him are untitled, but he gave titles to most of the ones that
                                                                                    
          Tottokš told him. Examination of the field notes shows how Gatschet gathered them. First, he
                                                                                    
          took the text down in Atakapa by dictation. Second, he went back over the text with his
                                                                                    
          consultant, making interlinear glosses in French and English, and making corrections to the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Atakapa text. When Tottokš became his consultant, he went back over the texts dictated by
                                                                                    
          Kišyuc, and made corrections and emendations in red ink.                  
                                                                                    
           The unglossed texts and translations are presented in a format that reflects the literary nature of
                                                                                    
          Atakapa speech, especially in the pairing of ideas, and groupings in twos and fours. The
                                                                                    
          analyzed texts are done traditionally and the commentary is based on the line numbers of the
                                                                                    
          analysis rather than on any numbering of lines in the unglossed versions. 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         232                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Text 1. Cultural and historical topics. The text translated below is found on pages 97-100 of
                                                                                    
          Gatschet’s field notes. He gave it no title, but Swanton entitled it “The Western Atakapa.” It
                                                                                    
          seems to be the response to a request such as, “Tell me how your people lived, what their chiefs
                                                                                    
          were like, what was marriage like, and what was religion like.” The form of the text that was
                                                                                    
          published in Gatschet and Swanton (1932:9-10) is not exactly what Gatschet recorded in his field
                                                                                    
          notes. Gatschet had gone over the text as spoken by Kišyuc with Tottokš and made emendations
                                                                                    
          in red, and Swanton incorporated these emendations uncritically and wholesale in the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          publication, which resulted in making certain sentences unclear. In addition, Swanton translated
                                                                                    
          the text without careful consideration of Gatschet’s interlinear glosses. 
                                                                                    
          Scene I. How the Indians Lived.                                           
                                                                                    
          yukhíti iša·k wáši a né·p nuŋnultíhin̥st                                  
                                                                                    
           túl ó·ši nuŋnultíhin̥st                                                  
                                                                                    
          tepúk néš híhulat                                                         
                                                                                    
           šéš néš híhulat                                                          
                                                                                    
            kiwilšó·l néš                                                           
                                                                                    
            tepúk kúckuc néš híhulat                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          móyu                                                                      
                                                                                    
           kimá·t                                                                   
                                                                                    
            còhoc                                                                   
                                                                                    
            konán ólo·l híhulat yáhinso.                                            
                                                                                    
          lansá·l                                                                   
                                                                                    
           šakó                                                                     
                                                                                    
            kanán                                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         233                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           nohámš áyip                                                              
                                                                                    
          n̥tí                                                                      
                                                                                    
           pí·t                                                                     
                                                                                    
            yá·n                                                                    
                                                                                    
            yáwlákla·k                                                              
                                                                                    
          šoknó·k                                                                   
                                                                                    
           nóktewmélme·l                                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            enkéwišt                                                                
                                                                                    
            anhipón                                                                 
                                                                                    
          akipcó·k                                                                  
                                                                                    
           paccalšópš                                                               
                                                                                    
            ƛákišt                                                                  
                                                                                    
            kónan áyip                                                              
                                                                                    
          kathópš                                                                   
                                                                                    
           náwóhoh                                                                  
                                                                                    
            kúy                                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            ó·l                                                                     
                                                                                    
          áliŋ hicó·m                                                               
                                                                                    
           áliŋ iškám                                                               
                                                                                    
            hiláŋwó·l téy                                                           
                                                                                    
            kúlšwalš yáhins.                                                        
                                                                                    
          The old Indian people customarily used to live in villages in this land.  
                                                                                    
           They customarily lived in villages on the edges of the lakes.            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         234                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          They planted peach trees;                                                 
                                                                                    
           they planted fig trees.                                                  
                                                                                    
            They planted apple trees,                                               
                                                                                    
            and they planted plum trees.                                            
                                                                                    
          Pumpkins,                                                                 
                                                                                    
           beans,                                                                   
                                                                                    
            maize,                                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
             and sweet potatoes,                                                    
                                                                                    
             they planted and habitually eat.                                       
                                                                                    
          Deer meat,                                                                
                                                                                    
           and bear,                                                                
                                                                                    
            and turtle,                                                             
                                                                                    
            and gallinule,                                                          
                                                                                    
          catfish,                                                                  
                                                                                    
           and perch,                                                               
                                                                                    
            and bowfin,                                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            and fresh water drum fish,                                              
                                                                                    
          ducks,                                                                    
                                                                                    
           and geese,                                                               
                                                                                    
            and prairie chicken,                                                    
                                                                                    
            and rabbits                                                             
                                                                                    
          anhinga,                                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         235                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           and squirrel,                                                            
                                                                                    
             and green briar roots,                                                 
                                                                                    
             and duck potatoes                                                      
                                                                                    
          water lilies,                                                             
                                                                                    
           chinquapins,                                                             
                                                                                    
            prickly pear cactus,                                                    
                                                                                    
            and persimmons                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          small grapes,                                                             
                                                                                    
           and broad grapes,                                                        
                                                                                    
            and muscadine,                                                          
                                                                                    
            and peanuts: they customarily eat them                                  
                                                                                    
          Scene II. Indian Chiefs and Religion                                      
                                                                                    
          yukhíti mo·n šokíti šakkéat                                               
                                                                                    
            šokóy tanùk mo·n šokiyáhi tannéw <óci>                                  
                                                                                    
          ló hál šokóyat yukhítšakišá·kut                                           
                                                                                    
           ló hiláy yukhìti winéulat káškin                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           hiyékiti šakyóŋšulat                                                     
                                                                                    
          kakáw hiyékiti iyáŋ nuŋnùltihín̥st                                        
                                                                                    
          tawwatwénat ocottá·tot                                                    
                                                                                    
           šoká·kulat ocottá·tot                                                    
                                                                                    
          šé·š púm                                                                  
                                                                                    
           wašwáši púm púmulat                                                      
                                                                                    
          The Indians all had headmen.                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         236                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          One chief was ahead in regard to things above all the others.             
                                                                                    
          Lo was the last chief pertaining to the Indian people.                    
                                                                                    
            The Indians found Lo’s wife at high tide.                               
                                                                                    
             They called them Sunrise-people.                                       
                                                                                    
             They customarily lived in villages towards the sunrise.                
                                                                                    
          They stood and prayed to She-who-stands-above;                            
                                                                                    
           they did a ceremonial dance to She-who-stands-above.                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          They danced the Infants’ Dance                                            
                                                                                    
           and the Old Men’s Dance.                                                 
                                                                                    
          Scene III. Indian Marriage                                                
                                                                                    
          išá·k hiláy tanúk kéat                                                    
                                                                                    
           išá·k hiláy cí·k kén̥ hacéheš                                            
                                                                                    
            palnàl hiláy wáši·k pámnimá·t                                           
                                                                                    
              hiláy tánik pámat                                                     
                                                                                    
               palnál hiláy wáši·kiš pámnima·t                                      
                                                                                    
               yil la·t himatólot tà·ttihin̥tat                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                 ha išá·t pámlíkš mo·n                                              
                                                                                    
                kawkáw ámn̥ ánike n̥táhn̥tat                                        
                                                                                    
          hakit hokišá·k hokyálul áwš                                               
                                                                                    
           hišn̥cé·t kišé·t wé·t hokyálul hinák                                     
                                                                                    
          A man had only one wife.                                                  
                                                                                    
           If a man has two wives, it is a bad thing.                               
                                                                                    
          Palnal’s older wife beat him to death.                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         237                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           Another wife beat him.                                                   
                                                                                    
            Palnal’s older wife beat him to death.                                  
                                                                                    
              He kept on living for three to four days.                             
                                                                                    
               His head was all beaten and crushed,                                 
                                                                                    
               and when he drank water, it kept on coming out of his ears.          
                                                                                    
          They are not able to take their cousins in marriage.                      
                                                                                    
           It would be as if a woman’s brother married a man’s sister or a woman’s sister.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Scene IV. Daily Life and Religion                                         
                                                                                    
          wóšiŋ ahinákat                                                            
                                                                                    
           kéšn̥ šakyól té·š mo·n šakmaŋmáŋat                                       
                                                                                    
           šakyò·l katnáw šakháhš                                                   
                                                                                    
          hatyúlšo n̥hóhik                                                          
                                                                                    
           šakhatkópšen hatmé·lšo                                                   
                                                                                    
           hakit išá·k káw[ot] hatmé·lšo                                            
                                                                                    
          púmuƛ náw hakìt išá·tip hatnáwn̥st hathícam                               
                                                                                    
           <púmuƛ> hakít šìŋšnanik                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           ikpúmuƛ hakít nàkšnan                                                    
                                                                                    
          It was as if they were naked.                                             
                                                                                    
           Women’s and men’s hair was all long.                                     
                                                                                    
           Men do not have beards.                                                  
                                                                                    
          They mark themselves with red face paint.                                 
                                                                                    
           When they paint themselves white, they paint themselves black.           
                                                                                    
           They paint themselves black for their dead relative.                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         238                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          They dance, and they customarily put feathers together on their heads.    
                                                                                    
           They dance with their rattles.                                           
                                                                                    
           They dance with their musical instruments.                               
                                                                                    
          Scene I. How the Indians Lived.                                           
                                                                                    
               [Yuk’hiˊti icāk wāci a nēp nūn nultiˊhinst]                          
                                                                                    
          1)   yukhíti iša·k wáši a né·p nunnúltíhin̥st                             
                                                                                    
               yukhiti   iša·k waši a   ne·-ip    nuŋ-nul-tihi-n̥št                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Indian    people old this land-INESS village-live- PST.PROG-CUSTOM   
                                                                                    
               ‘The old Indian people customarily used to live in villages in this land.’
                                                                                    
               [tuˊl ōˊci nūn nultiˊhinst]                                          
                                                                                    
          2)   tul o·ši nuŋnultihin̥st                                              
                                                                                    
               tul  o·ši      nuŋ-nul-tihi-n̥št                                     
                                                                                    
               lake edge.of   village live-PST.PROG-CUSTOM                          
                                                                                    
               ‘They customarily lived in villages on the edges of the lakes.’      
                                                                                    
               [tepuˊk neˊc hihulat ceˊc-neˊc hihulat]                              
                                                                                    
          3)   tepúk néš híhulat šéš néš híhulat                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               tepuk neš hih-ul-at      šeš  neš  hih-ul-at                         
                                                                                    
               peach tree plant-3PLS-PRET fig tree plant-3PLS-PRET                  
                                                                                    
               ‘They planted peach trees; they planted fig trees.’                  
                                                                                    
               [Kiˊwilc ōˊl neˊc tepuˊk kuˊtskuts neˊc hihulat]                     
                                                                                    
          4)   kiwilšó·l néš tepúkkúckuc néš híhulat                                
                                                                                    
               kiwilš-o·l          neš  tepukkuckuc neš hih-ul-at                   
                                                                                    
               white.person-persimmon tree plum   tree plant-3PLS-PRET              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         239                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘They planted apple trees, and they planted plum trees.’             
                                                                                    
               [Moˊyu[m]1 kimāt tso-oˊts konăˊn olōˊl hihulat yaˊ-ins(o)]           
                                                                                    
          5)   móyu kimá·t còhoc konán ólo·l híšulat yáhins (K) yáhinso (T)         
                                                                                    
               moyu      kima·t    cohoc     konan ol,o·l   hih-ul-at               
                                                                                    
               pumpkin   beans     maize     potato REDUP,sweet plant-3PLS-PRET     
                                                                                    
               yah-inso·                                                            
                                                                                    
               eat- HABIT                                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               “They planted and habitually eat pumpkins, beans, maize, and sweet potatoes.’
                                                                                    
               [Laˊns āˊl cakoˊ kanăˊn nohaˊmc aˊyip]                               
                                                                                    
          6)   lansá·l šakó kanán nohámš áyip                                       
                                                                                    
               lans-a·l  šako      kanan     nohamš    ay-ip                        
                                                                                    
               deer-meat bear      turtle    chicken   swamp-INESS                  
                                                                                    
               ‘Deer meat, and bear, and turtle, and gallinule,’                    
                                                                                    
               [ndiˊ pīˊt i-aˊn yaoˊ láklāk]                                        
                                                                                    
          7)   n̥tí pí·t yán yáwlákla·k                                             
                                                                                    
               n̥ti      pi·t      ya·n      yawlakla·k                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               catfish   perch     bowfin    drum.fish                              
                                                                                    
               ‘Catfish, and perch, and bowfin, and fresh water drum fish,          
                                                                                    
               [coknōˊk noˊkte-u meˊlmēl enkeˊwict anhipoˊn]                        
                                                                                    
          8)   šoknó·k nóktewmélme·l enkéwišt anhipón                               
                                                                                    
               šokno·k   noktewmelme·l  enkewišt       anhipon                      
                                                                                    
               duck      goose          prairie.chicken rabbit                      
                                                                                    
               ‘Ducks, and geese, and prairie chicken, and rabbits,                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         240                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [akip tsōk paˊtsal cōˊpc ɬaˊkict koˊnen aˊyip]                       
                                                                                    
          9)   akipcó·k paccalšópš ƛákišt kónan áyip                                
                                                                                    
               akipco·k  pakcalšopš ƛakišt   konan     ay-ip                        
                                                                                    
               anhinga   squirrel  green.briar potato  swamp-INESS                  
                                                                                    
               ‘Anhinga, and squirrel, and green briar roots, and duck potatoes,’   
                                                                                    
               [kat’hōˊpc naˊ-u-oˊhox ggu-i ōl]                                     
                                                                                    
          10)  kathópš náwóhoh kúy ó·l                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               kathopš   naw-,oh,oh     kuy            o·l                          
                                                                                    
               water.lily hair-,REDUP,thorny prickly.pear.cactus persimmon          
                                                                                    
               ‘Water lilies, chinquapins, prickly pear cactus, and persimmons,’    
                                                                                    
               [aˊliñ hicōm aˊliñ hickăˊm hilaˊñ-wōl teˊ-i kuˊlc-wālc yaˊ-ins]      
                                                                                    
          11)  áliŋ hicó·m áliŋ iškám hiláŋwó·l téy kúlšwalš yáhins                 
                                                                                    
               aliŋ      hico·m    aliŋ      iškam     hilaŋ-wo·l tey               
                                                                                    
               grapes    small     grapes    broad     vulture-eye vines            
                                                                                    
               kulšwalš  yah-inš                                                    
                                                                                    
               peanuts   eat-HABIT                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘Small grapes, and broad grapes, and muscadine, and peanuts: they habitually
                                                                                    
               eat them.’                                                           
                                                                                    
          Scene II. Indian Chiefs and Religion                                      
                                                                                    
               [Yuk’hiˊti mōn cokiˊti cakeˊat]                                      
                                                                                    
          12)  yukhíti mo·n šokíti šakkéat                                          
                                                                                    
               yukhiti   mo·n šokiti    šak-ke-at                                   
                                                                                    
               Indians   all  headman   3plstats-have-PRET                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         241                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘The Indians all had headmen.’                                       
                                                                                    
               [cokoˊ-i taˊnuk mōn cokiyaˊ-i <ōˊtsi> taneˊ-uts]                     
                                                                                    
          13)  šokóy tanùk mo·n šakiyáhi tannéw [óci]                               
                                                                                    
               šokoy tanuk mo·n šak-ø-iyahi       tan-hew   oci                     
                                                                                    
               chief one all  3PLO-3STATS-be.ahead of other-PL above                
                                                                                    
               ‘One chief was ahead in regard to all things above the others.’      
                                                                                    
          Line as intended by Gatschet:                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               {Ló hál shokó-iyit yuk’hít(i)shakishákput}                           
                                                                                    
          14)  ló šokóyat hál yokhítšakišá·kut                                      
                                                                                    
               lo   hal  šokoy-ø-at     yukhit-šak-iša·k-ut                         
                                                                                    
               PN   last be.chief-3SS-PRET Indian-PL-person-DIR                     
                                                                                    
               ‘Lo was the last chief pertaining to the Indian people.’             
                                                                                    
          Line as published by Swanton:                                             
                                                                                    
               [Loˊ cokoˊ-iyit haˊl yuk’hiˊts(?) cakicaˊkip ut]                     
                                                                                    
          14x) ló šokóyat hál yokhítšakišá·kut                                      
                                                                                    
               lo   šokoy-ø-at     hal  yukhit-šak-iša·k-ut                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               PN   be.chief-3SS-PRET last Indian-PL-person-DIR                     
                                                                                    
               ‘Lo was the chief last pertaining to the Indian people.’             
                                                                                    
          Line as intended by Gatschet:                                             
                                                                                    
               {Ló hilá-i yok’hití winé-ulat kā́shki}                               
                                                                                    
          15)  ló hiláy yukhìti winéulat káškin.                                    
                                                                                    
               lo   hilay yukhiti  wine-ul-at     kaš-kin                           
                                                                                    
               PN   wife Indian    find-3PLS-PRET be.high.tide-WHEN                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         242                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘The Indians found Lo’s wife at high tide.’                          
                                                                                    
          Line as published by Swanton:                                             
                                                                                    
               [Loˊ hilaˊ-i yok’hitiˊ wineˊ-ulat]                                   
                                                                                    
          15x) ló hiláy yukhìti winéulat.                                           
                                                                                    
               lo   hilay yukhiti  wine-ul-at.                                      
                                                                                    
               PN   wife Indian    find-3PLS-PRET                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘The Indians found Lo’s wife.’                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Hiyeˊkiti cakioˊnhulet]                                             
                                                                                    
          16)  hiyékiti šakyóŋšulat                                                 
                                                                                    
               hiyekiti       šak-yoŋš-ul-at                                        
                                                                                    
               sunrise.people 3PLO-call-3PLS-PRET                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘They called them Sunrise-people’                                    
                                                                                    
               [kauká-u hiyeˊkiti hiyaˊñ nuˊñ nultehiˊnst]                          
                                                                                    
          17)  kakáw hiyékiti iyáŋ nuŋnùltihín̥st.                                  
                                                                                    
               kakaw hiyekiti iyaŋ nuŋ-nul-tihi-n̥št.                               
                                                                                    
               sun  sunrise   there village-live- PST.PROG-CUSTOM                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘They customarily lived in villages towards the sunrise.’            
                                                                                    
               [Tawatweˊnăt Utsutaˊt ut. Cukaˊkulĕt Utsutaˊt ut.]                   
                                                                                    
          18)  tawwatwénat ocottá·tot šoká·kulat ocottá·tot                         
                                                                                    
               taw-hat-wen-ø-at         ocotta·t-ot šoka·k-ul-at                    
                                                                                    
               STAND-REFLEX-pray-3S-PRET PN-DIR   ceremonial.dance-3PL-PRET         
                                                                                    
               ocotta·t-ot                                                          
                                                                                    
               PN-DIR                                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         243                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘They stood and prayed to She-who-stands above; they did a ceremonial dance to She-
                                                                                    
               who-stands-above.’                                                   
                                                                                    
               [ceˊc pûˊm wacwaˊci pûˊm puˊmulat]2                                  
                                                                                    
          19)  šé·š púm wašwáši púm púmulat                                         
                                                                                    
               še·š      pum       waš,waši  pum       pum-ul-at                    
                                                                                    
               infant(pl) dance    REDUP,old dance     dance-3PL-PRET               
                                                                                    
               ‘They danced the Infants’ Dance and the Old Men’s Dance.’            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Scene III. Indian Marriage                                                
                                                                                    
               [Iˊcāk hilaˊ-i tanuˊk keˊat]                                         
                                                                                    
          20)  išá·k hiláy tanúk kéat.                                              
                                                                                    
               iša·k     hilay tanuk ø-ke-at.                                       
                                                                                    
               person    wife one  3STATS-have-PRET                                 
                                                                                    
               ‘A man had only one wife.’                                           
                                                                                    
               [icāk hilaˊ-i tsīk keˊ-en hatseˊ-ec]                                 
                                                                                    
          21)  išá·k hiláy cí·k kén̥ hacéheš                                        
                                                                                    
               iša·k     hilay ci·k ø-ke-n̥       haceheš                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               person    wife two  3STATS-have-IF be.bad                            
                                                                                    
               ‘If a man has two wives, it is a bad thing.’                         
                                                                                    
               [Paˊlnal hilaˊ-i waˊci3 pām-nimāt]                                   
                                                                                    
          22)  palnàl hiláy wáši·k pámnimá·t                                        
                                                                                    
               palnal hilay waši-ik     pam-nima-at                                 
                                                                                    
               PN   wife old-ERG.AGNT   beat-kill-PRET                              
                                                                                    
               ‘Palnal’s4 older wife beat him to death.’                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         244                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Hilaˊyi taˊxnik paˊmat]                                             
                                                                                    
          23)  hiláy tánik pámat                                                    
                                                                                    
               hilay tan-ik        pam-at                                           
                                                                                    
               wife other-ERG.AGNT beat-PRET                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘Another wife beat him.’                                             
                                                                                    
               [Palnaˊl hilaˊ-i waˊci kic paˊm-nimāt]                               
                                                                                    
          24)  palnál hiláy wáši·kiš pámnima·t                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               palnal hilay waši-ik-iš  pam-nima-at                                 
                                                                                    
               PN   wife old-ERG.AGNT-FOC beat-kill-PRET                            
                                                                                    
               ‘Palnal’s older wife beat him to death.’                             
                                                                                    
               [yiˊl lāt himatoˊl-u tatiˊhin-tāt]5                                  
                                                                                    
          25)  yíl lá·t himatólot tà·ttihin̥tat                                     
                                                                                    
               yil  la·t himatol-ot ta·t-tihi-n̥t-at                                
                                                                                    
               day  three four-DIR stand(sg)-CONTIN-PRET                            
                                                                                    
               ‘He kept on living for three to four days.’                          
                                                                                    
               [ha icāˊt pāˊmlikc mōn kaukaˊ-u aˊm’n aˊnike ntaˊhĕntat]             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          26)  ha išá·t pámlikš mo·n kawkáw ámn̥ ánike n̥táhn̥tat.                  
                                                                                    
               ha   iša·t ø-pam-likš    mo·n kawkaw    ø-am-n̥        an-ike        
                                                                                    
               his  head 3STATS-beat-crush all water   3STATS-drink-WHEN ear-EL     
                                                                                    
               n̥tah-n̥t-at.                                                        
                                                                                    
               come.out-CONTIN-PRET                                                 
                                                                                    
               ‘His head was all beaten and crushed, and when he drank water, it kept on
                                                                                    
               coming out of his ears.’                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         245                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Hakīt hukicaˊk hokiaˊlul aˊ-uc]                                     
                                                                                    
          27)  hakit hokišá·k hokyálul áwš                                          
                                                                                    
               hakit hok-iša·k     hok-yal-ul     ø-awš                             
                                                                                    
               their RECIP-person  RECIP-take-3PLS 3STATS-not.be.able               
                                                                                    
               ‘They are not able to take their cousins in marriage.’               
                                                                                    
          Line as intended by Gatchet:                                              
                                                                                    
               {hic’ntsēt kicēˊt wēt okiaˊlul hinak}                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          28)  išn̥cé·t kišé·t wé·t hokyálul hinák                                  
                                                                                    
               išn̥ce·t       kiše·t    we·t           hok-yal-ul     hinak         
                                                                                    
               woman’s.brother man’s.sister woman’s.sister RECIP-take-3PLS be.like  
                                                                                    
               ‘It would be as if women’s brothers married men’s sisters or women’s sisters.’
                                                                                    
          Line as published by Swanton:                                             
                                                                                    
               [hic’ntsēt wēt a hinak kicēˊt okiaˊlul ināk]                         
                                                                                    
          28x) išn̥cé·t wé·t ahinák kišé·t hokyálul hinák.                          
                                                                                    
               išn̥ce·t       we·t           ahinak    kiše·t                       
                                                                                    
               woman’s.brother woman’s.sister be.like  man’s.sister                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               hok-yal-ul     hinak.                                                
                                                                                    
               RECIP-take-3PLS be.like                                              
                                                                                    
               ‘It would be as if women’s brothers and sisters married, as if men married their
                                                                                    
               sisters.’                                                            
                                                                                    
          Scene IV. Daily Life and Religion                                         
                                                                                    
               [woˊciña hinaˊkĕt]                                                   
                                                                                    
          29)  wóšiŋ ahinákat                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         246                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               wošiŋ     ø-ahinak-at                                                
                                                                                    
               be.naked  3STATS-be.like-pret                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘It was as if they were naked.’                                      
                                                                                    
               [kéˊc ‘n6 cakióˊl téc mōñ cakmañmáˊñĕt]                              
                                                                                    
          30)  kéšn̥ šakyól té·š mo·n šakmaŋmáŋat                                   
                                                                                    
               keš=n̥         šakyol    te·š mo·n šak-maŋ,maŋ-at                    
                                                                                    
               woman(pl)=and  man       hair all  3PLSTATS-REDUP, be.long-PRET      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘Women’s and men’s hair was all long.’                               
                                                                                    
               [caˊkiol katnaˊu cak āˊx̥ c.]                                        
                                                                                    
          31)  šakyòl katnáw šakháhš                                                
                                                                                    
               šakyol    katnaw    šak-hahš                                         
                                                                                    
               man       beard     3PLSTATS-not.have                                
                                                                                    
               ‘Men do not have beards.’                                            
                                                                                    
               [Hatiuˊlco ‘n’oˊhik]                                                 
                                                                                    
          32)  hatyúlšo n̥hóhik                                                     
                                                                                    
               hat-yulš-o·         n̥hoh-ik                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               REFLEX-mark-PHR.TERM red.face.paint-ERG.INSTR                        
                                                                                    
               ‘They mark themselves with red face paint.’                          
                                                                                    
               [cakatkoˊpcĕn hatmēˊlco]                                             
                                                                                    
          33)  šakkatkópšn̥ hatmé·lšo                                               
                                                                                    
               šak-hat-kop-š-n̥              hat-me·l-š-o·                          
                                                                                    
               3PLSTATS-REFLEX-be.white-CAUS-WHEN REFLEX-be.black-CAUS-PHR.TERM     
                                                                                    
               ‘When they paint themselves white, they paint themselves black.’     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         247                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [hakīt icáˊk káˊ-u hatmēˊlco]                                        
                                                                                    
          34)  hakit išá·k káw[ot] hatmé·lšo                                        
                                                                                    
               hakit iša·k    kaw-ot    hat-me·l-š-o·                               
                                                                                    
               their person   dead-DIR  REFLEX-be.black-CAUS-PHR.TERM               
                                                                                    
               ‘They paint themselves black for their dead relative.’               
                                                                                    
               [puˊmudl naˊ-u haˊkit icaˊtip hatnaˊ-inst? hatiˊdsom]                
                                                                                    
          35)  púmuƛ náw hakìt išá·tip hatnáwšn̥st hathícam                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               pum-ul-h       naw       hakit iša·t-ip hat-nawš-n̥št                
                                                                                    
               dance-3PLS-TOP feather   they head-INESS REFLEX-put.in-CUSTOM        
                                                                                    
               hat-hicam                                                            
                                                                                    
               REFLEX-join.together                                                 
                                                                                    
               ‘They dance, and they customarily put feathers together on their heads.’
                                                                                    
               [<puˊmudl> hakiˊt ciñcnăˊni]                                         
                                                                                    
          36)  <púmuƛ> hakít šìŋšnanik                                              
                                                                                    
               pum-ul-h       hakit šiŋšnan-ik                                      
                                                                                    
               dance-3PLS-TOP their rattle-ERG.INSTR                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘They dance with their rattles.’                                     
                                                                                    
               [tikpuˊmudl hakiˊt naxcnăˊn]                                         
                                                                                    
          37)  ikpúmuƛ hakít nàkšnan                                                
                                                                                    
               ik-pum-ul-h         hakit nakšnan                                    
                                                                                    
               INSTR-dance-3PLS-TOP their musical.instruments                       
                                                                                    
               ‘They dance with their musical instruments.’                         
                                                                                    
          Addition by Tottokš:                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         248                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Loˊ yukiˊti haˊl cox̥ koˊyit yuk’hit cakicaˊk ut]                   
                                                                                    
          14a) ló yukhíti halšokóyat yukhitšakišá·kot                               
                                                                                    
               lo   yukhiti   hal-šokoy-ø-at      yukhit-šak-iša·k-ot               
                                                                                    
               PN   Indian    be.last-be.chief-3SS-PRET Indian-PL-person-DIR        
                                                                                    
               ‘Lo was the last Indian chief pertaining to the Indian people.       
                                                                                    
               [Ló hilá-i yuk’híti winé-ulat]                                       
                                                                                    
          14b) ló hiláy yukhíti winéulat                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               lo   hilay yukhiti  wine-ul-at                                       
                                                                                    
               PN   wife Indian    find-3PLS-PRET                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘The Indians found Lo’s wife.’                                       
                                                                                    
               [Há cakicāk Hiyékiti cakióñculat]                                    
                                                                                    
          14c) ha šakišá·k hiyékiti šakyóŋšulat                                     
                                                                                    
               ha   šak-iša·k hiyekiti  šak-yoŋš-ul-at                              
                                                                                    
               her  PL-person sunrise.people 3PLO-call.by.name.-3PLS-PRET           
                                                                                    
               ‘They called her relatives the Sunrise People.’                      
                                                                                    
               [Kaukaú káckin winé-ulat]                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          14d) kawkáwkáškin winéulat                                                
                                                                                    
               kawkaw-kaš-kin      wine-ul-at                                       
                                                                                    
               water-be.high.-WHEN find-3PLS-PRET                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘They found her when the tide was high.’                             
                                                                                    
               [Hiyeˊkiti cakioˊñculat]                                             
                                                                                    
          14e) hiyékiti šakyóŋšulat                                                 
                                                                                    
               hiyekiti       šak-yoŋš-ul-at                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         249                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               sunrise.people 3PLO-call.by.name.-3PLS-PRET                          
                                                                                    
               ‘They called them the Sunrise People.’                               
                                                                                    
               [nuˊnkin toˊhulat kakauˊ iyeˊtsnē ûˊt]                               
                                                                                    
          14f) núŋkin tóhulat kakáw iyécneot                                        
                                                                                    
               nuŋ-kin   toh-ul-at      kakaw     iyec-ne-ot                        
                                                                                    
               village-LOC dwell-3PLS-PRET sun    rise-GER-DIR                      
                                                                                    
               ‘They lived in villages towards where the sun rises.’                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Commentary. Line 1. Difficulties with this text start at the very beginning. Swanton translated
                                                                                    
          á né·p as “here below (in this bend)’ and ‘below this place’ and relate it to the verb né·p ‘to be
                                                                                    
          low.’ However, the verb né·p only refers to lowness in elevation, not to position. Actually, the
                                                                                    
          text form né·p is the inessive case form of né· ‘land,’ < né·ip (cf. pó·p < póh-ip ‘by steam’) and
                                                                                    
          á is the deictic, not a locational noun, which in any case is áp. The clincher is that the interlinear
                                                                                    
          gloss Gatschet gives in his field notes for this phrase is “in this land.”
                                                                                    
          Line 3. From here on are foodstuffs mentioned in sets of four. They originally started in groups
                                                                                    
          of three, but when Gatschet went over the text with Kišyuc, she inserted items to make them
                                                                                    
          groups of four. The list of foodstuffs starts with planted trees. The next four are agricultural
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          plants. The next four are hunted animals and large birds, the next four are fish, the next groups
                                                                                    
          are smaller birds and mammals, the next group splits, with two going with the preceding group
                                                                                    
          of birds and mammals, and the other two going with the next two groups of gathered plant foods.
                                                                                    
          In total, there are eight groups of four foodstuffs mentioned.            
                                                                                    
          Only in this text does the verb híh ‘to plant’ occur. Elsewhere in Gatschet’s field notes the verb
                                                                                    
          ‘to plant’ is given as híš, but the writing in the text is absolutely clear. The variation provided by
                                                                                    
          Swanton, [hiculat] (híšulat), does not occur in Gatschet’s field notes.   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         250                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Line 5. In the Gatschet and Swanton publication [Yaˊ-ins(o)] is written for the final verb, as if it
                                                                                    
          were a sentence of its own. In Gatschet’s notes, {yá-ins} is written below the line with a carat
                                                                                    
          inserting it into the sentence above. Later, he went over the text with Tottokš and inserted the o
                                                                                    
          in parentheses, meaning that both forms were correct here. Intervocalic h’s are often not
                                                                                    
          recorded in Gatschet’s notes, but comparison with other forms of the verb ‘to eat’ show the root
                                                                                    
          is yah. The suffix is the habitual suffix –ins, and translated in combination with the previous verb
                                                                                    
          is ‘they planted them, and they habitually eat them.’                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Line 6. The bird name nohámš ayip ‘chicken within the swamp’is glossed dinde farouche,
                                                                                    
          which in French means ‘wild turkey,’ and Gatschet translated it ‘turkey.’ However, Jeffery
                                                                                    
          Darensbourg of the Atakpa-Ishak tribe pointed out that the turkey is not native to the
                                                                                    
          environment in which the Atakapa used to live, and that given the congruence with the Louisiana
                                                                                    
          French term for the gallinule, poule d’eau de marais ‘chicken of the water of the swamp,’ that
                                                                                    
          the Atakpa term actually refers to the gallinule.                         
                                                                                    
          Line 9. The word akipcó·k ‘anhinga’ is an archaic compound, a(·)k-ip có·k ‘blackbird found
                                                                                    
          within the water.’ The word á·k at present does not mean water, but ‘liquid,’ perhaps even ‘thick
                                                                                    
          liquid’ cf. miŋá·k ‘honey’ (míŋ ‘bee’) and néškolaˑk ‘molasses’ (néškol ‘sugar’). The word at the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          end of this line, konán áyip, ‘duck potato’ fits the pattern of inessive-case formed compound
                                                                                    
          nouns discussed above: ‘the potato that is found within the swamp.’       
                                                                                    
          Line 11. In the original dictation, Kišyuc repeated konán ólo·l, ‘sweet potatoes,’ which she had
                                                                                    
          already mentioned in line 5. When Gatschet went over the text with Tottokš, either she or he
                                                                                    
          noticed the duplication, and inserted kúlšwálš, ‘peanuts,’ in its place. This change is not noted in
                                                                                    
          the publication.                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         251                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Line 12. Here starts a section about the political organization of the Atakapa. The word šokíti,
                                                                                    
          which seems to be from šok ‘things’ and íti ‘in front of’ seems to mean ‘headmen’ as opposed to
                                                                                    
          the head chief mentioned next.                                            
                                                                                    
          Line 13. This line is difficult, not so much in its meaning, which is clear, but in the Atakapa,
                                                                                    
          which seems to contain an unnoticed correction by Kišyuc. It is written in the field notes:
                                                                                    
          {shokíti ó-i tánuk mōn shokiyá-i ṓ́tsi tané-uts}. For the first word Kišyuc said šokíti ‘headman,’
                                                                                    
          then changed it to šokóy ‘chief.’ Comparison with a gloss added by Gatschet and given by
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Tottokš, and not included anywhere in the publication7, shows that iyáhi is a ditransitive stative
                                                                                    
          verb which means ‘to be ahead of someone in regard to something.’8 The sequence ṓtsi tané-uts
                                                                                    
          is not clear, unless one surmises that Kišyuc said šakiyáhi óci…tannéw óci meaning to be
                                                                                    
          understood as having said šakiyáhi tannéw óci, as óci is a postposition, and should be following
                                                                                    
          the noun it governs, not preceding it as here. Gatschet’s gloss is chef une beaucoup haut au
                                                                                    
          dessus les autres tous (one chief much higher above all the others).      
                                                                                    
          Lines 14-17. The description of Lo and his wife was clearly too compressed for Tottokš when
                                                                                    
          the text was read to her, so she dictated the following lines to replace them, which are found on
                                                                                    
          page 147 of Gatschet’s field notes:                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ló yukhíti halšokóyat yukhitšakišá·kot Lo was the last chief pertaining to the Indians
                                                                                    
          ló hiláy yukhíti winéulat     The Indians found Lo’s wife                 
                                                                                    
          ha šakišá·k hiyékiti šakyóŋšulat They called her people the Sunrise people
                                                                                    
          kawkáwkáškin winéulat         They found her when the tide was high       
                                                                                    
          hiyékiti šakyóŋšulat          They called them Sunrise people             
                                                                                    
          núŋkin tóhulat kakáw iyécneot They lived in villages towards the sunrise. 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         252                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Here Tottokš makes more explicit the relationship between the ethnic name hiyékiti, which
                                                                                    
          Kišyuc treated as the word ‘sunrise,’ with the verb iyéc ‘to rise, of the sun.’ The story of Lo’s
                                                                                    
          wife Fanchonette9 is intriguing. She was found as a child by the Atakapa at high tide; does that
                                                                                    
          mean she was a passenger on a canoe which sank, and she swam to shore? On page 51 of
                                                                                    
          Gatschet’s field notes, Kišyuc links Fanchonette’s people to the dialect spoken in the east; two of
                                                                                    
          the words recalled, hápalšt ‘two’ and kám ‘fire’ are recorded in Duralde’s 1803 vocabulary as
                                                                                    
          happalst and cam (Gallatin, 1836:307-67); thus, the Hiyékiti are definitely the Eastern Atakapa.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Line 14. This is a difficult line, made more difficult by Swanton’s uncritical inclusion of some
                                                                                    
          of Gatschet’s emendations, and omission of others. Gatschet put numbers beneath the first three
                                                                                    
          words to show their proper order, but these were ignored. In the second half of the phrase it
                                                                                    
          seems that Kišyuc said (Gatschet 1885:98): {yuk’híts(i)shakishákput} phonetically
                                                                                    
          /yukhitšakiša·kput/. Gatschet inserted and questioned the i in parentheses10 on his first review of
                                                                                    
          the text with Kišyuc, then on his second review with Tottokš added in red an i between the k and
                                                                                    
          p, then inserted above them -kip út and later again wrote a slash in pencil between the -kip and
                                                                                    
          út, and put a question mark by the -kip. Kišyuc used the unusual compound yukhit-šakiša·k
                                                                                    
          ‘Indian people, Atakapa people,’ then started to put the phrase in the inessive case with -ip in its
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          secondary usage, then changed her mind and thought the directional case would be better, and
                                                                                    
          thus said -ot. This is clearly what Tottokš understood, for in her retelling of this line, she uses
                                                                                    
          yukhit-šakiša·kot putting the compound noun in the directional case. Thus, there is no
                                                                                    
          justification for the published form [cakicaˊkip ut].                     
                                                                                    
          Line 15. Under the gloss for winéulat, ‘they found her,’ Gatschet added ‘(as a child) and further
                                                                                    
          below added ({kā́shki} swelling of the sea), which he clearly intended to be the final word of the
                                                                                    
          sentence. This was missed by Swanton.                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         253                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Lines 18-19. This is a discussion of religion. Here the deity is called Ucutá·t, while in the
                                                                                    
          dictionary the name is given as Ocotá·t, the writing of the former showing pre- and post-
                                                                                    
          accentual weakening. The name breaks down into oc-ot, the directional case form of the
                                                                                    
          postposition oc ‘above,’ plus the verb stem ta·t ‘to stand (sg).’ This epithet suggests that Ocota·t
                                                                                    
          was the sun, and female, as the sun was so considered throughout the Southeastern area.
                                                                                    
           The dances called here šé·š púm and wašwáši púm ‘the infants’ dance’ and ‘the elders’ dance’
                                                                                    
          are given different names by Kišyuc on page 41 of Gatschet’s field notes where they are called
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          {shakwáshi shokāk} šakwáši šoká·k ‘the old men’s ceremonial dance’ and {shókak shókshuks}
                                                                                    
          šokà·k šókšukš ‘young people’s ceremonial dance.’ Kišyuc seems to have treated the terms púm
                                                                                    
          and šoká·k as being relatively equivalent to each other, whereas Tottokš insisted on the
                                                                                    
          distinction, with púm being a secular dance, and šoká·k being a ceremonial dance.
                                                                                    
          Lines 20-28. This is a discussion of marriage rules. The dictum that a man was to have one wife
                                                                                    
          is given, then the example of Palnal is given as to why having more than one wife was bad. The
                                                                                    
          discussion continues with the prohibition against cousins marrying.       
                                                                                    
          Lines 22-24. There are some strange features about these lines as presented. The transitive
                                                                                    
          verb pam ‘to beat something’ is used in all three lines, and the object of the verb is human, but
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          seemingly only in the second line is the subject noun in the ergative case. What we have here
                                                                                    
          seems to be a case of hypercorrection and missegmentation. In line 47, in the sequence /waši·k
                                                                                    
          pamnima·t/ Gatschet scratched out the k of the ergative suffix that he had originally written. In
                                                                                    
          line 49, the word waši·kiš was segmented into the two words waši ‘old’ and kiš ‘woman’ and
                                                                                    
          translated as ‘old woman.’ This is incorrect, not only because the adjective here is made to
                                                                                    
          precede the noun, which is against the rules of Atakapa grammar, but also the language has an
                                                                                    
          idiomatic expression for ‘old woman,’ kiš kop ‘white (-haired) woman.’ The word waši·kiš is
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         254                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          segmented correctly as waši-ik-iš ‘old-ERG.AGNT-FOC,’ the focus form of the noun phrase
                                                                                    
          indicating that while another of his wives beat him, it was the older wife who beat him to death.
                                                                                    
          Line 25. There is a mishearing in this line, as well as a mistranslation. In the sequence yíl lá·t
                                                                                    
          himatólot tà·ttihin̥tat, the two sequences of double t’s are not written. So instead of himatólot
                                                                                    
          being understood as the directional case form of the numeral (Atakapa numerals being nouns)
                                                                                    
          himatól ‘four’ with vowel weakening, it was written [himatoˊl-u] and a unique and spurious
                                                                                    
          morpheme *-u ‘or’ was created. The verb tà·ttihin̥tat does not mean ‘lie on the ground.’ The root
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          is ta·t, which means ‘to stand (sg).’ Clearly, Palnal, with his head beaten in, was not able to
                                                                                    
          stand, so the verb here seems to mean ‘stayed,’ suggesting that he lived three or four days after
                                                                                    
          he was beaten, not that his body lay on the ground for that time, and the following line about the
                                                                                    
          water he drank running out his ears makes more sense, if he were still able to drink after the
                                                                                    
          beating. Thus, instead of the translation, “When Palnal’s older wife beat him to death his body
                                                                                    
          lay on the ground three or four days with the head mashed in. The water he had drunk ran out of
                                                                                    
          his ears,” we have:                                                       
                                                                                    
          “Palnal’s older wife beat him to death.                                   
                                                                                    
          He kept on living for three or four days;                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          his head was all beaten and mashed;                                       
                                                                                    
          the water he drank kept on running out of his ears.”                      
                                                                                    
          Furthermore, reading Text 8 about burial customs, we find that a dead person was buried the day
                                                                                    
          after death. It seems highly unlikely that Palnal’s dead body was undiscovered for three or four
                                                                                    
          days; in a small village society everyone must have known about what happened, and he would
                                                                                    
          have been buried immediately. The fact of his not dying was of importance, and why the amount
                                                                                    
          of time it lasted was remembered.                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         255                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Lines 27-28. These lines are very difficult, again because of Swanton tacitly including
                                                                                    
          emendations in the published text, and not following Gatschet’s word order notes. The word
                                                                                    
          hokiša·k is used to mean ‘cousins,’ according to Gatschet’s marginal note, to which Swanton did
                                                                                    
          not refer. Just as šakiša·k means ‘relatives on both sides of the family,’ hokiša·k means ‘cousins
                                                                                    
          on both sides of the family.’ The prefix hok- is the reciprocal prefix, so this word indicates
                                                                                    
          people with relationships with one another. Line 28 only makes sense if it is read as follows:
                                                                                    
          hišn̥cé·t wé·t [hokyálul] ahinák                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kišé·t hokyálul hinák.                                                    
                                                                                    
          it is as if women’s brothers and women’s sisters marry each other         
                                                                                    
          it is as if they [men] married with men’s sisters                         
                                                                                    
          This is not at all what Gatschet intended. Line 28 was dictated by Kišyúc with no other verb but
                                                                                    
          ahinák ‘to be like; to be so:’ {hish’ntsēt wet ahinák kîshēt}. When Gatschet went back over the
                                                                                    
          text with Kišyuc, he added subscript numerals to show the correct word order: {hish’ntsēt kîshēt
                                                                                    
          wet ahinák}. Finally, he went over the text with Tottokš, added a macron to {wēt} and the
                                                                                    
          words {okiálul ināk} in red. Clearly Gatschet intended for {okiálul ināk} to replace {ahinák},
                                                                                    
          thus producing the clear and grammatical sentence: {hish’ntsēt kîshēt wet okiálul ināk} hišn̥cé·t
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kišé·t wé·t hokyálul hinák ‘It would be as if a woman’s brother married a man’s sister or a
                                                                                    
          woman’s sister.’                                                          
                                                                                    
           The languages of the Southeast make elaborate distinctions in terms for brothers and sisters
                                                                                    
          based on sex and age of speaker. Here the term hišn̥ce·t which is glossed in the dictionary only
                                                                                    
          as ‘brother’ is paired with we·t ‘woman’s sister,’ and given that the narrator was a woman,
                                                                                    
          hišn̥ce·t must mean ‘woman’s brother.’ There is no term paired with kiše·t ‘man’s sister,’ but it is
                                                                                    
          tempting to see the term n̥ce·t, also glossed ‘brother’ as actually meaning ‘man’s brother.’
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         256                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Lines 32-37. These five lines are probably the most difficult of the text. The word order is
                                                                                    
          different from the usual, and there are rare forms and suffixes. Notable is the presence of the
                                                                                    
          suffix -o. This cannot be the first-person singular subject marker for the aorist, for the context
                                                                                    
          requires the subjects of the verbs to be third-person plural. Rather, this seems to be the phrase-
                                                                                    
          terminal marker -o·, as discussed above in Chapter 2.                     
                                                                                    
          Line 33. In the phrase šakhatkópšn̥ hatmé·lšo, šak- is being treated as a third-person plural
                                                                                    
          stative subject marker, and the suffix -n̥ indicates that the action of the first verb precedes and
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          accompanies the action of the second verb, thus the line can be translated ‘when they paint
                                                                                    
          themselves white, they paint themselves black.’ This implies when the Atakapa painted
                                                                                    
          themselves, they used the two colors at the same time.                    
                                                                                    
          Line 34. In the phrase hakít iša·k káw hatmé·lšo, the elements hakít iša·k káw clearly mean ‘their
                                                                                    
          dead person,’ but hatmé·lšo means ‘they paint themselves black.’ Now, the dead person is not
                                                                                    
          painting herself or himself, so the phrase must be a benefactive, and should have the directional
                                                                                    
          case suffix -ot/-ut. It is quite possible that this element was missed in taking down the dictation,
                                                                                    
          so it is restored to make the sense clear: ‘they painted themselves black for their dead relatives.’
                                                                                    
          Line 35. Fronting the verb seems to be done to give it prominence. The change of the phoneme
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          is reminiscent of how Natchez verbs that end in resonant consonants surface with voiceless
                                                                                    
          resonants as the result of the connective suffix -k devoicing them, and then being dropped
                                                                                    
          (Kimball, 2005:399). It is tempting to see ƛ here as an archaism, given that ƛ does not occur in
                                                                                    
          word-final position, and where ƛ occurs in final position in other dialects, l is found in this
                                                                                    
          dialect. However, there are other examples in this text of final or medial -ul, where there is no
                                                                                    
          change, which suggests the fronting of the verb to the beginning of the sentence and the change
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         257                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          of the final consonant are linked. I shall postulate here a suffix -h, ‘topicalizer,’ with the caveat
                                                                                    
          that this morpheme is by no means confirmed.                              
                                                                                    
           The word questioned in this line, [hatnaˊ-inst?], has a complex history. Gatschet first wrote
                                                                                    
          {hatnaˊ-inst}, then went back and overwrote the i with an sh. Then, when he went back over it
                                                                                    
          with Tottokš, she could not understand what he was saying, and so he added three question
                                                                                    
          marks in red over the word. It seems that Kišyuc had said náw hakít išá·tip hatináwšn̥st
                                                                                    
          hathícam and that Gatschet misheard the complex phoneme cluster wšn̥st. The meaning of the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          sentence is ‘They customarily put feathers together on their heads.’      
                                                                                    
           The final word of the line, written {hatídsom} and glossed ‘they placed,’ does not make any
                                                                                    
          sense. The word is listed in the dictionary with the meaning ‘little things placed on themselves’
                                                                                    
          This is a mistake, as the reflexive prefix hat- is never used with intransitive verbs. Elsewhere in
                                                                                    
          the dictionary is the verb hicám meaning ‘to join together,’ which is the proper transcription and
                                                                                    
          translation of the word used here.                                        
                                                                                    
          Lines 36-37. These lines are very difficult as well. When they were read to Tottokš, she seems
                                                                                    
          not to have understood them well, for she turned the verb into a locational phrase. The problem
                                                                                    
          here seems to be a combination of compression on the part of the speaker, and mishearing on the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          part of the transcriber. Line 36 makes sense if one repeats the verb púmuƛ from the previous
                                                                                    
          line, and realize that the sequence of words written {shingshnä́ni tikpúmudl} was pronounced
                                                                                    
          /šiŋšnánikikpúmuƛ/, that is šiŋšnán-ik, ik-púmuƛ, and that the sequence [kik] was misheard as
                                                                                    
          [tik]11 and mistaken for the prefix tik- ‘to go and do something.’ This slight change allows for a
                                                                                    
          clear translation of these two lines. Instead of “sounding a rattle at the dancing place” (1932:11)
                                                                                    
          we have, “They danced with their rattles; they danced with their musical instruments.” The
                                                                                    
          variant form {tikpū́mst} provided by Kišyuc for {tikpúmudl} (with the initial consonant wrongly
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         258                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          copied) is ikpúmn̥st, ik-pum-n̥st ‘they habitually dance with them.’12 The form for the last word
                                                                                    
          that Tottokš supplied is {tikpum nékin}, which seems to be /tikpúm né·kin/ ‘they go and dance
                                                                                    
          on the ground,’ and has no semantic connection with the following words /hakít nakšnán/ ‘their
                                                                                    
          musical instruments.’ The nakšnán is glossed in the dictionary as ‘a musical instrument like a
                                                                                    
          xylophone, from 2 to 3 feet long, used in accompanying dances.’ (1932:84) 
                                                                                    
          Text 2. The Skin-desirer. Found on page 100 of Gatschet’s field notes, this text is a bit of
                                                                                    
          Atakapa folklore. Gatschet did not give it a title, but underlined the first word, which was his
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          usual way further on in his field notes to indicate a title. Swanton used that word as the title and
                                                                                    
          gave it the heading “Caktaˊlko (Human-skin Desirer).” While the Skin-Desirer seems to be a
                                                                                    
          monster unique to the Atakapa, various kinds of unpleasant beings are found in the oral
                                                                                    
          literatures of the peoples of the Southeast, such as the Long-Nosed Monster of the Chitimacha
                                                                                    
          (neka šiš kˀamin), the Clawed Witch of the Tunica (tínikówi), or the Koasati Eater-of-the-Living
                                                                                    
          (okcayyaí:pa). There is a short discussion of this being on page 43 of Gatschet’s field notes; an
                                                                                    
          insertion when going over these notes with Tottokš led to the creation of the spurious variant
                                                                                    
          form [*icakctaˊlko] which occurs in the dictionary portion of the publication. Gatschet inserted
                                                                                    
          /sh/ between the elements {shak} and {tálko} to indicate the variant form štálkoh, which is
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          formed by the regular, if rare, rule of initial syllable syncope; the initial i is placed in
                                                                                    
          parentheses, as if Gatschet thought the etymology were from išá·k tál kóh ‘he desires a man’s
                                                                                    
          skin’ rather than the more likely šaktál kóh ‘he desires skins.’ This text is structured entirely with
                                                                                    
          one pair of lines and two extended couplets, and is the closest thing to an Atakapa traditional
                                                                                    
          narrative that has been preserved.                                        
                                                                                    
          šaktálkoh yukhíti iša·k káw ha tál kóhat                                  
                                                                                    
            hinák šakyóŋšulat.                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         259                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          išá·k išat hán húulat                                                     
                                                                                    
            póhol cá·tn̥ húulat                                                     
                                                                                    
             ha išá·t ha úš mo·n náwšim                                             
                                                                                    
          kiwílš hìkulat tówn̥táwm̥                                                 
                                                                                    
            néš išó·mškin yukhíti túlip lóhkin iwá·tn̥ hún̥st                       
                                                                                    
             yíl iwá·tn̥.                                                           
                                                                                    
          The Skin-desirer wanted the skin of a dead Indian;                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           for this reason they named it so.                                        
                                                                                    
          They saw it as not having a human head.                                   
                                                                                    
           Afterwards they saw that it was lowered.                                 
                                                                                    
            His head and his whole body were nothing but hair.                      
                                                                                    
          White people have caught sight of it sometimes.                           
                                                                                    
           They customarily see it in the brush around Lake Prien,                  
                                                                                    
            when it moves towards them in the prairie,                              
                                                                                    
            when it moves towards them by day.                                      
                                                                                    
               [Caktaˊlko Yuk’hiˊti icaˊk kaˊ-u haˊtalkoˊat hinaˊk cakioˊñculĕt]    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          1)   šaktálkoh yukhíti išá·k káw ha tàl kóhat hinák šakyóŋšulat           
                                                                                    
               šak-tal-koh    yukhiti iša·k  kaw  ha   tal  ø-koh-at                
                                                                                    
               pl-skin-wanter Indian person  dead his  skin 3STATS-want-PRET        
                                                                                    
               hinak     šak-yoŋš-ul-at                                             
                                                                                    
               be.like   3PLO-call-3PLO-PRET                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘The Skin-desirer wanted the skin of a dead Indian; for this reason they named it so.’
                                                                                    
               [Icāˊk icaˊt haˊn huˊ-ulat]                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         260                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          2)   išá·k išá·t há·n húulat                                              
                                                                                    
               iša·k     iša·t ha·n          hu-ul-at                               
                                                                                    
               person    head not.to.have(GER) see-3PLS-PRET                        
                                                                                    
               ‘They saw it as not having a human head.’                            
                                                                                    
               [poˊ-ol tsāˊt’n huˊulat]                                             
                                                                                    
          3)   póhol cá·tn̥ húulat                                                  
                                                                                    
               pohol     ca·tn̥    hu-ul-at                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               lowered   afterwards see-3PLS-PRET                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘Afterwards they saw that it was lowered.’                           
                                                                                    
               [ha icāˊt ha uˊc mōn naˊ-ucĕm]                                       
                                                                                    
          4)   ha išá·t ha úš mo·n náwšim                                           
                                                                                    
               ha   iša·t ha  uš   mo·n ø-naw-šim                                   
                                                                                    
               his  head his  body all  3STATS-hair-NOTHING.BUT                     
                                                                                    
               ‘His head and his whole body were nothing but hair.’                 
                                                                                    
               [Kiwilc hikuˊlat toˊ’ntaˊvm]                                         
                                                                                    
          5)   kiwílš hìkulat tówn̥táwm̥                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               kiwilš         hik-ul-at           town̥tawm̥                        
                                                                                    
               white.people   catch.sight-3PLS-PRET sometimes                       
                                                                                    
               ‘White people have caught sight of it sometimes.’                    
                                                                                    
               [nec hicoˊmckin yuk’hiˊti tulip lōˊx̥ kin iwāˊt’n hūˊnst yiˊl iwāˊt’n]
                                                                                    
          6)   neš išó·mškin yukhíti túlip lókkin iwá·tn̥ hún̥st yíl iwá·tn̥        
                                                                                    
               neš  išo·mš-kin yukhiti  tul-ip    lok-kin                           
                                                                                    
               tree small-LOC Indian    lake-INESS prairie-LOC                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         261                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ø-iwa·t-n̥          hu-n̥št   yil       ø-iwa·t-n̥                   
                                                                                    
               3STATS-move.hither-WHEN see-CUSTOM by.day 3STATS-move.hither-WHEN    
                                                                                    
               ‘They customarily see it in the brush around Lake Prien (Indian Lake), when it
                                                                                    
               moves towards them in the prairie, when it moves towards them by day.’
                                                                                    
          Commentary.                                                               
                                                                                    
          Line 3. This text has more than its share of hapax legomena; both póhol ‘lowered’ and cá·tn,
                                                                                    
          ‘afterwards’ occur only here in the corpus.                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Line 6. This sentence has a nice contrast in the usage of the locative and inessive cases. The
                                                                                    
          Skin-desirer is in the brush and in the prairie, a specific location, and thus the locative case, but
                                                                                    
          only in the general vicinity of Lake Prien, thus the inessive case.       
                                                                                    
           The verb iwá·t is not listed as a separate entry in Swanton’s dictionary. Confusingly, the
                                                                                    
          example sentences are listed under o, apparently because it is glossed ‘come’ by Gatschet
                                                                                    
          (Swanton decided that the “root” of the verb ‘to come’ was o, even though it is always ók). The
                                                                                    
          example sentences, however, suggest that the meaning of iwá·t is ‘move in the direction of the
                                                                                    
          speaker.’ This makes the story of the Skin-Desirer even more creepy as it suggests that the
                                                                                    
          monster perceives the white people looking at it, and starts to move in their direction, apparently
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          hoping to get their skins. It should be remembered that white people used to be called ‘dead
                                                                                    
          people’ in Atakapa (išá·k šappíhk), presumably from the color of their skins, and the Skin-
                                                                                    
          Desirer wants the skin of a dead person.                                  
                                                                                    
          Text 3. Treatment of the heads of infants. This short ethnographic text is found on page 112 of
                                                                                    
          Gatschet’s field notes; the emendations given by Tottokš are found on page 147. He gave it the
                                                                                    
          title “Children’s Ears and Faces.” It seems to have been a response to a question about whether
                                                                                    
          the Atakapa ever flattened the skulls of their infants, which seems to have been still a practice of
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         262                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          the Choctaw, who in 1885 lived further up the Calcasieu River. Earlier in Gatschet’s fieldnotes,
                                                                                    
          on page 94, there is a short discussion in English about the topic; this text is an elaboration of it.
                                                                                    
          This is the last text that was dictated by Kišyuc. Interestingly enough, exactly like Text 2, it is
                                                                                    
          composed of an initial pair of lines, followed by two extended couplets.  
                                                                                    
          yukhíti·š nómš iša·tkin páltitháh.                                        
                                                                                    
           cáhta ahinák iša·tkin šappalšatháh                                       
                                                                                    
          hoké·t hakít úc šakitólšn̥st                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           án šakitólšn̥st                                                          
                                                                                    
            ahinákka úc šakiwíln̥st                                                 
                                                                                    
          itiyílš tanúk šakiwíln̥st                                                 
                                                                                    
           án šakitólšn̥st tanúkip yílkit mo·n                                      
                                                                                    
           hakít án kimátip né ócot án šakitólšn̥st                                 
                                                                                    
          Tottokš variations:                                                       
                                                                                    
          Line 2: cahtá·š hakít nómš išá·t šakpalpálišat                            
                                                                                    
          Line 6: hakít án kimátip né ócot án teltélšn̥st                           
                                                                                    
          Kišyuc version:                                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          As for the Atakapa, the children do not have flat places on their heads.  
                                                                                    
           They did not make them flat on the heads like the Choctaw.               
                                                                                    
          The mothers customarily arranged their noses,                             
                                                                                    
           and they arranged their ears                                             
                                                                                    
            in how they customarily put these noses in order.                       
                                                                                    
          They customarily put them in order for one month.                         
                                                                                    
           They customarily unfold their ears once throughout the day,              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         263                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           They customarily unfold the inside of the ear from bottom to top.        
                                                                                    
          Tottokš version:                                                          
                                                                                    
          As for the Atakapa, the children do not have flat places on their heads.  
                                                                                    
           As for the Choctaw, they flattened the various heads of their children.  
                                                                                    
          The mothers customarily arranged their noses,                             
                                                                                    
           and they arranged their ears                                             
                                                                                    
            in how they customarily put these noses in order.                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          They customarily put them in order for one month.                         
                                                                                    
           They customarily unfold their ears once throughout the day,              
                                                                                    
           They customarily unfold the inside of their ears from bottom to top.     
                                                                                    
               [Yukiˊtic noˊmc icāˊtkin paˊltit haˊ]                                
                                                                                    
          1)   yukhíti·š nómš išá·tkin páltitháh.                                   
                                                                                    
               yukhiti-iš nomš     iša·t-kin ø-pal-tit-hah.                         
                                                                                    
               Indian-FOC child    head-LOC  3STATS-be.flat-PROG(PL)-NEG            
                                                                                    
               ‘As for the Atakapa, the children do not have flat places on their heads.’
                                                                                    
               [Tsaˊxtaˊ aihināˊk icātkiñ capaˊłcitaˊ-ha]                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          2)   cáhta ahinák išá·tkin šappalšatháh                                   
                                                                                    
               cahta     ahinak    iša·t-kin šak-pal-š-at-háh                       
                                                                                    
               Choctaw   be.like   head-LOC  3PLSTATS-be.flat-CAUS-PRET-NEG.        
                                                                                    
               ‘They did not make them flat on the heads like the Choctaw.’         
                                                                                    
               [Hukēˊt hakīˊt uˊts cakitoˊlcĕnst aˊn cakitoˊlcĕnst ahenaˊka uˊts cakiwiˊlĕnst]
                                                                                    
          3)   hoké·t hakít úc šakitólšn̥st án šakitólšn̥st ahinákka úc šakiwíln̥st 
                                                                                    
               hoke·t hakit uc šak-itolš-n̥st     an   šak-itolš-n̥st               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         264                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               mother their nose 3PLO-arrange-CUSTOM ear 3PLO-arrange-CUSTOM        
                                                                                    
               ahinakka  uc   šak-iwil-n̥st                                         
                                                                                    
               like      nose 3PLO-put.in.order-CUSTOM                              
                                                                                    
               ‘The mothers customarily arranged their noses, and they arranged their ears
                                                                                    
               like they customarily put their noses in order.’                     
                                                                                    
               [Itiyiˊlc tanuˊk cakiwiˊlĕnst]                                       
                                                                                    
          4)   itiyílš tanúk šakiwílnst                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               itiyilš   tanuk     šak-iwil-n̥st                                    
                                                                                    
               month     one       3PLO-put.in.order-CUSTOM                         
                                                                                    
               ‘They customarily put them in order for one month.’                  
                                                                                    
               [An cakteˊlcĕnst tanuˊkip yiˊlkit mōn]                               
                                                                                    
          5)   án šaktélšn̥st tanúkip yílkit mo·n                                   
                                                                                    
               an   šak-telš-n̥st       tanuk-ip  ø-yil-kit           mo·n          
                                                                                    
               ear  3PLO-unfold-CUSTOM  one-INESS 3STATS-be.day-PROG(SG) all        
                                                                                    
               ‘They customarily unfold their ears once throughout the day.’        
                                                                                    
               [hakīˊt an kimaˊtip neˊoˊts oˊt aˊn cakteˊlcnt]                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          6)   hakít án kimátip né ócot án šaktélšn̥st                              
                                                                                    
               hakit an  kimatip   ne        oc-ot     an   šak-telš-n̥st           
                                                                                    
               their ear inside    bottom    top-DIR   ear  3PLO-unfold-CUSTOM      
                                                                                    
               ‘They customarily unfold the inside of the ear from bottom to top.’  
                                                                                    
          Variations from Tottokš:                                                  
                                                                                    
               [Tsaxtaˊ hakīt noˊmc icaˊt cakpalpaˊlicat]                           
                                                                                    
          2a)  cahtá·š hakít nómš išá·t šakpalpálišat                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         265                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               cahta-iš       hakit nomš     iša·t šak-,pal,pal-iš-at               
                                                                                    
               Choctaw-FOC    their child    head 3PLO-,REDUP,be.flat-CAUS-PRET     
                                                                                    
               ‘The Choctaw flattened the various heads of their children.’         
                                                                                    
               [hakīˊt an kimaˊtip neˊoˊts oˊt aˊn telteˊlcnst]                     
                                                                                    
          6a)  hakít án kimátip né ócot án teltélšn̥st                              
                                                                                    
               hakit an  kimatip   ne        oc-ot     an                           
                                                                                    
               their ear inside    bottom    top-DIR   ear                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               tel,telš-n̥st                                                        
                                                                                    
               ,REDUP,-unfold-CUSTOM                                                
                                                                                    
               ‘They customarily unfold the inside of their ears from bottom to top.’
                                                                                    
          Commentary.                                                               
                                                                                    
          Line 1. Because the noun yukhíti is a focus form, it cannot be the possessor of nómš ‘child;
                                                                                    
          children.’ The verb pál ‘be flat’ is intransitive, so it is not a subject; the subject of the verb is
                                                                                    
          nómš. As the text is a comparion of customs between the Atakapa and Choctaw, the word
                                                                                    
          yukhítiš puts the focus first on the Atakapa, and so is best translated ‘As for the Atakapa.’
                                                                                    
          Line 2. The published form [capaˊłcitaˊ-ha] is an error on Swanton’s part. Gatschet originally
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          wrote {shapá’lshitá}, and when he went back over the text with Tottokš, he wanted to make sure
                                                                                    
          that he understood that the element {á} was the negative, so he wrote {-há} in red after the word.
                                                                                    
          The phonetics of the word Kišyuc spoke seem to have been /šappál̥šətháh/; Gatschet did not
                                                                                    
          write the geminate p, the th cluster, or the word-final h, and heard the unstressed a as i, and
                                                                                    
          indicated the devoicing of l before a stop by the apostrophe before it. Totokš altered the sentence
                                                                                    
          so the subject referred to the Choctaw, and replaced the singular verb pálš, with the plural
                                                                                    
          palpáliš.                                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         266                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Line 2a. The sentence as published suggests that the noun cahtá, should be in the ergative case,
                                                                                    
          not the absolutive state. However, when Gatschet took the dictation, he originally wrote {Tsa’htá
                                                                                    
          shakīt} for the phrase in sandhi /cahtá·šhakít/, where the noun is in the focus form. As he never
                                                                                    
          understood the nature of the focus suffix, he went back and scratched out the {s}. However, the
                                                                                    
          change that Tottokš made to the second line makes the couplet more perfect:
                                                                                    
           yukhíti·š nómš iša·tkin páltitháh.                                       
                                                                                    
            cahtá·š hakít nómš išá·t šakpalpálišat                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           As for the Atakapa, the children do not have flat places on their heads. 
                                                                                    
            As for the Choctaw, they flattened the various heads of their children. 
                                                                                    
          Line 6a. Tottokš seems not to have liked a single-action verb referring to a plurality of actions,
                                                                                    
          so she replaced the verb télš ‘to unfold something’ with teltélš ‘to unfold numerous things.’
                                                                                    
          Kišyuc clearly felt that the third-person plural object prefix šak- was sufficient.
                                                                                    
          Text 4. Form Letter. Found on pages 154-157 of Gatschet’s field notes, this long and
                                                                                    
          linguistically interesting text is not a natural one. The first clue comes with the title. He first
                                                                                    
          gave it the title “Letter” in English, then two Atakapa titles, yúlš ‘writing’ and šakyúlš ‘writing
                                                                                    
          them,’ which he scratched out, finally choosing {Yúlsh Shakín ók} which Gatschet thought
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          meant ‘written invitation to come for a visit’ (Gatschet, 1885b:159). This title is written at the
                                                                                    
          top of page 154 in Swanton’s hand. However, cakín is a form of the verb ín ‘to ask’ with a third-
                                                                                    
          person plural object, and ók as it stands is not a gerund, so the phrase yúlš šakín ók means
                                                                                    
          ‘writing asks people and comes,’ which does not make much sense. It seems to have been a
                                                                                    
          practice of linguists in the last quarter of the 19th century, when they had difficulty eliciting a
                                                                                    
          natural text, to translate a letter into the language (cf. Biloxi; Dorsey and Swanton, 1912:22-23).
                                                                                    
          This is the first text dicated by Tottokš, which may be the reason why Gatschet used this format.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         267                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          This text divides into four sections, three of which appear to be relatively natural texts elicited by
                                                                                    
          a statement such as, ‘What would you say to someone who you wanted to come and visit?’ The
                                                                                    
          first half of the fourth section, however, looks to have been written by Gatschet, and translated
                                                                                    
          sentence by sentence, and not well-understood by Tottokš. The second half of the fourth section,
                                                                                    
          however, does appear less artificial.                                     
                                                                                    
          Scene I: Inquiries                                                        
                                                                                    
          yíl páhw n̥yáwta n̥ókne                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           aŋicón itólšo n̥ké·tne yukít áŋkin                                       
                                                                                    
          yúlš hióy,                                                                
                                                                                    
           ók núhc á?                                                               
                                                                                    
           n̥tánat n̥háh?                                                           
                                                                                    
          hatnáhka máŋ ké·t n̥ úhc á?                                               
                                                                                    
          I am to wait seven days for you to come,                                  
                                                                                    
           I have prepared a room for you to stay in at our house.                  
                                                                                    
          Send a writing to me!                                                     
                                                                                    
           Are you able to come?                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           Or are you not?                                                          
                                                                                    
            How long are you able to stay?                                          
                                                                                    
          Scene II: Visit plans                                                     
                                                                                    
          yíl mo·n táy ó hoktiwé·išwáŋehe                                           
                                                                                    
           n̥tán nešpaliconkin tóhiya                                               
                                                                                    
            lóhkin tiwšakn̥onš išwáŋehe                                             
                                                                                    
               n̥tán tukémš išwáŋehe                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         268                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          yáŋ tíwya náwohóh išyá·mšne                                               
                                                                                    
           áyip kunán kathópš camakúc šokmó·n išyá·mšehe                            
                                                                                    
            kicóŋškin iššakwáktikit                                                 
                                                                                    
          n̥tín̥ pítya katpá kokkokišo·ik šakišáwcel                                
                                                                                    
           yukít kán šakticya                                                       
                                                                                    
            šakicáy héw                                                             
                                                                                    
              yáhhatpénicel                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          téŋš tanstálik išaŋkámšne                                                 
                                                                                    
           šoktól išké·tne                                                          
                                                                                    
          All day we might go about together beside the river,                      
                                                                                    
           or get in a buggy                                                        
                                                                                    
            and go visit people on the prairie,                                     
                                                                                    
            or we might go about rowing in a boat.                                  
                                                                                    
          We are to go there and gather chinquapins;                                
                                                                                    
           we may gather everything, duck potatoes, waterlilies, and crawfish.      
                                                                                    
            We will roast them in the fire.                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          We will catch with a fishing line catfish and perch, and we will catch trout
                                                                                    
           We will bring them to our home,                                          
                                                                                    
            fry many,                                                               
                                                                                    
            and eat enough.                                                         
                                                                                    
          We are to play cards in the evening,                                      
                                                                                    
           and we should have luck.                                                 
                                                                                    
          Scene III: Village Gossip                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         269                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          yukít núŋkin púm išháhš á itiyílš                                         
                                                                                    
           yukhíti ica·ttókš cokóy wáši káwat.                                      
                                                                                    
          ha hiláy šoké·šya káwhánat                                                
                                                                                    
           koyíw hiwéw kéat                                                         
                                                                                    
            yukhíti ipšók ókya péniat                                               
                                                                                    
              póšk tóchittáwš                                                       
                                                                                    
              canúk míšat pénine                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          We are not having a dance in our village this month.                      
                                                                                    
           The Indian, Išattokš, the old chief, died.                               
                                                                                    
          His wife was sick and almost died.                                        
                                                                                    
           A strong cold had her.                                                   
                                                                                    
            The Indian doctor came and cured her;                                   
                                                                                    
              he sucked out the blood.                                              
                                                                                    
              She gave him a horse for curing her.                                  
                                                                                    
          Scene IV: Personal Gossip                                                 
                                                                                    
          Nakít canúk šakwinétem nakšakaɬišat                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           ká yílhiwéw cikát lá·t                                                   
                                                                                    
            icá·k canúkkin [šak]íŋi šaknáwš                                         
                                                                                    
              iyánik mo·n n̥ káne,                                                  
                                                                                    
               šakwiné šakwáŋišya šaktúkulat                                        
                                                                                    
                 iša·k šokšakcáŋš kóŋ úhc                                           
                                                                                    
          kilétkíš yilkeya yílhiwéw cikát cí·kya                                    
                                                                                    
            cí·š kéne ó·l                                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         270                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
             há·š <John><Annie> yilwáytikit                                         
                                                                                    
          wi šaknómš púškin waŋáŋkámštit šoktókšik                                  
                                                                                    
           šakyólnómš hakít šakyólšokhatké mo·n lušim tálšim                        
                                                                                    
             cí·š waŋhayháyškit                                                     
                                                                                    
          hiyén tem nimácelya kuyakhól šakkácel                                     
                                                                                    
          ók išhú pélháh canúkkin itéw ókne                                         
                                                                                    
           n̥tól á?                                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           n̥hatnáhka á?                                                            
                                                                                    
          <‘Did you find the horses you lost?’ >                                    
                                                                                    
           <‘It happened three weeks ago.’>                                         
                                                                                    
            Let people on horses look!                                              
                                                                                    
              That there is all that you do.                                        
                                                                                    
               They find them, drive them, and bring them.                          
                                                                                    
               They can catch the thief.                                            
                                                                                    
          Kiletkiš got married two weeks ago,                                       
                                                                                    
           and is to have a baby soon.                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
             John, he will marry Annie.                                             
                                                                                    
          My children are going about outside playing with a ball.                  
                                                                                    
           The boys’ trousers are nothing but dirt and nothing but holes.           
                                                                                    
            The baby goes about crying.                                             
                                                                                    
          Yesterday we killed a pig and made sausages.                              
                                                                                    
          Come! See us! It is not far to come riding on a horse.                    
                                                                                    
           Are you well?                                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         271                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           How are you?                                                             
                                                                                    
          Scene I: Inquiries                                                        
                                                                                    
               [Yiˊl paˊxĕ ‘nyaˊ-uta ‘noˊkne]                                       
                                                                                    
          1)   yíl páhw n̥yáwta n̥ókne                                              
                                                                                    
               yil  pahw      n̥-yaw-ta           n̥-ok-ne                          
                                                                                    
               day  seven     2SOBJ-wait.for-PCPL 2SSTATS-come-GER                  
                                                                                    
               ‘I am to wait seven days for you to come.’                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [aˊñ-idsōˊn otōˊlco ‘nkēˊtne yukiˊt aˊnkin]                          
                                                                                    
          2)   aŋicón itólšo n̥ké·tne yukít áŋkin                                   
                                                                                    
               aŋicon    itolš-o   n̥-ke·t-ne          yukit aŋ-kin                 
                                                                                    
               room      prepare-1SS 2SSTATS-stay-GER  our  house-LOC               
                                                                                    
               ‘I have prepared a room for you to stay in at our house.’            
                                                                                    
               [Yuˊlc ioˊ-i oˊk ‘nuˊxts aˊ’ntaˊnat ‘nhaˊh]                          
                                                                                    
          3)   yúlš hióy. ók n̥úhc á. n̥tánat n̥háh                                 
                                                                                    
               yulš      hi-oy-ø        ok   n̥-uhc         a    n̥tan-at           
                                                                                    
               writing   1SO-send-2SIMP come 2SSTATS-be.able Q   be.or-PRET         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               n̥-hah                                                               
                                                                                    
               2SSTATS-be.not                                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘Send a note to me! Are you able to come? Or are you not?’           
                                                                                    
               [aˊtna x̥ ka māˊñ keˊt ‘nuˊxts a]                                    
                                                                                    
          4)   hatnáhka máŋ ké·t n̥ úhc á?                                          
                                                                                    
               hatnahka  maŋ       ke·t n̥-uhc         a?                           
                                                                                    
               how       be.long   stay 2SSTATS-be.able Q                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         272                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘How long are you able to stay?’                                     
                                                                                    
          Scene II: Visit plans                                                     
                                                                                    
               [Yiˊl mōn taˊ-i ō hoˊktiwē icwāˊñĕhĕ ‘ntaˊn neˊc-paˊl idsonˊkin toˊ(h)i-a
                                                                                    
          5)   yíl mo·n táy ó hoktiwé·išwáŋehe n̥tán nešpalhicónkin tóhiya          
                                                                                    
               loˊx̥ kin tiˊu-sakioˊns icwāˊñĕhĕ ntaˊn tuˊ-kēˊmc icwāˊñĕhĕ]         
                                                                                    
               lókkin tiwšakn̥óns išwáŋehe n̥tán tukémšišwáŋehe                     
                                                                                    
               yil  mo·n tay  o     hok-tiwe·-iš-waŋ-ehe              n̥tan         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               day  all  river beside RECIP-be.together-1PLSTATS-go.about-DUB be.or 
                                                                                    
               nešpalhicon-kin tohi=ya  lok-kin   tiw-šak-n̥onš                     
                                                                                    
               buggy-loc      get.in=and prairie-LOC GO(PL)-3PLO-visit              
                                                                                    
               iš-waŋ-ehe          n̥tan     tu-kemš-iš-waŋ-ehe                     
                                                                                    
               1PLSTATS-go.about-DUB be.or   boat-row-1PLSTATS-go.about-DUB         
                                                                                    
               ‘All day we might go about together beside the river, or get in a buggy and go
                                                                                    
               visit people on the prairie, or we might go about rowing in a boat.’ 
                                                                                    
               [iyāˊñ tīˊv ia naˊ-u oxoˊx icyāˊmcne aˊyip kună kaxlōˊpc tsăma kuˊts coxmōˊn
                                                                                    
          6)   iyáŋ tíwya náwohóh išyá·mšne áyip konán kathópš cimakúc šohmó·n      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               icyāˊmcĕhĕ Kidsoˊnkckin (i)cakwāktikit]                              
                                                                                    
               išyá·mšehe kicónkškin iššakwáktikit                                  
                                                                                    
               iyaŋ tiw=ya    nawohoh   iš-ya·mš-ne         ay-ip     konan         
                                                                                    
               there go=and   chinquapin 2PLSTATS-gather-GER swamp-LOC potato       
                                                                                    
               kathopš   cimakuc   šoh-mo·n  iš-ya·mš-ehe        kicoŋš-kin         
                                                                                    
               waterlily crawfish  thing-all 2PLSTATS-gather-DUB fire-LOC           
                                                                                    
               iš-šak-wak-tikit                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         273                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               1PLSTATS-3PL.OBJ-roast-FUT                                           
                                                                                    
               ‘We are to go there and gather chinquapins; we may gather everything, duck
                                                                                    
               potatoes, waterlilies, and crawfish. We will roast them in the fire.’
                                                                                    
               [Ntiˊ ‘n pīt yaˊ katpaˊ kokoˊkic-oˊ-ik cakicauˊtsĕl]                 
                                                                                    
          7)   n̥tín̥ pítya katpá kokkókišó·ik šakišáwcel                           
                                                                                    
               nti=n     pit=ya    katpa     kokkókiš-o·-ik                         
                                                                                    
               catfish=and perch=and trout(pl) fishhook-cord-ERG.INSTR              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               šak-išáw-cel                                                         
                                                                                    
               3PLO-catch(pl)-1PLS                                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘We will catch with a fishing line catfish and perch, and we will catch trout.’
                                                                                    
               [yukiˊt kăn caktīˊts ya cakitsaˊ-e heˊ-u yaˊ-e (h)atpeˊnecel]        
                                                                                    
          8)   yukít kán šakticya šakicáy héw yáhhatpénicel                         
                                                                                    
               yukít kán šak-tic=ya     šak-icay  hew  yah-hat-peni-cel             
                                                                                    
               our  home 3PLO-bring=and 3PLO-fry  many eat-REFLEX-do.enough-1PLS    
                                                                                    
               ‘We will bring them to our home, fry many, and eat enough.’          
                                                                                    
               [Tēˊñs tanstaˊlik icankaˊmcne coxtoˊl ickēˊtne]                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          9)   téŋs tanstálik išaŋkámšne šoktól išké·tne                            
                                                                                    
               teŋ-iš    tanstal-ik     iš-aŋkamš-ne        šoktol                  
                                                                                    
               evening-FOC cards-ERG.INSTR 1PLSTATS-play(pl)-GER luck               
                                                                                    
               iš-ke·tne                                                            
                                                                                    
               1plSTATS-have(GER)                                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘We are to play cards in the evening, and we should have luck.’      
                                                                                    
          Scene III Village Gossip                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         274                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Yukiˊt nuˊnkin puˊm ichāˊxc a itiyiˊlc]                             
                                                                                    
          10)  yukít núŋkin púm išháhš a itiyílš                                    
                                                                                    
               yukit nuŋ-kin  pum       iš-hahš        a    itiyilš                 
                                                                                    
               our  village-LOC dance   1PLSTATS-not.have this month                
                                                                                    
               ‘We are not having a dance in our village this month.’               
                                                                                    
               [Yukiˊti Icaˊt toˊkc coxkoˊ-i waˊci kaˊwĕt]                          
                                                                                    
          11)  yukhíti iša·ttókš šokóy wáši káwat                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               yukhiti   iša·ttókš šokoy waši ø-kaw-at                              
                                                                                    
               Indian    PN        chief old 3STATS-die-PRET                        
                                                                                    
               ‘The Indian, Išattokš, the old chief, died.                          
                                                                                    
               [Haˊ hilaˊ-i cok’hēˊc yaˊ kaˊ-u haˊnĕt Koyiˊu hiweˊ-u keˊat]         
                                                                                    
          12)  ha hiláy šoké·šya káwhánat koyíw hiwéw kéat                          
                                                                                    
               ha   hilay šoke·š=ya ø-kaw-han-at            koyiw hiwew             
                                                                                    
               his  wife be.sick=and 3STATS-die(sg)-ALMOST-PRET cold strong         
                                                                                    
               ø-ke-at                                                              
                                                                                    
               3STATS-have-PRET                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘His wife was sick and almost died. A strong cold had her.’          
                                                                                    
               [Yuk’hiˊti ipcōˊk oˊk yaˊpeˊneat póˊck tōˊts hitaˊ-uc]               
                                                                                    
          13)  yukhíti ipšók ókya péniat póšk tó·chitáwš                            
                                                                                    
               yukhiti   ipšok     ok=ya     ø-peni-ø-at    pošk                    
                                                                                    
               Indian    doctor    come=and  3OBJ-cure-3SS-PRET blood               
                                                                                    
               to·c-hitawš-ø                                                        
                                                                                    
               suck-take.out-3SS                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         275                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘The Indian doctor came and cured her; he sucked out the blood.’     
                                                                                    
               [Tsanuˊk miˊcat pēˊnene]                                             
                                                                                    
          14)  canúk míšat pénine                                                   
                                                                                    
               canuk     ø-miš-ø-at          péni-ne                                
                                                                                    
               horse     3OBJ-give-3SS-PRET  cure-GER                               
                                                                                    
               ‘She gave him a horse for curing her.’                               
                                                                                    
          Scene IV Personal Gossip                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Nakīˊt tsanuˊk cakwinētēm cakaˊxlecat]                              
                                                                                    
          15)  nakít canúk šakwinétem nakšakáɬišat                                  
                                                                                    
               nakit     canuk šak-wine-tem  nak-šak-aɬiš-at                        
                                                                                    
               your(pl)  horse 3PLO-find-2PLS 2PLSTATS-3PLO-lose-PRET               
                                                                                    
               <‘Did you find the horses you lost?’ >                               
                                                                                    
               [kaˊ yiˊl hiweˊ-u tsikaˊt lāt]                                       
                                                                                    
          16)  ká yílhiwéw cikát lá·t                                               
                                                                                    
               ka-ø yil-hiwew cikat la·t                                            
                                                                                    
               do-3S day-strong ago three                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               <‘It happened three weeks ago.’>                                     
                                                                                    
               [Icāk tsanuˊki iˊñi caknaˊ-uc]                                       
                                                                                    
          17)  icá·k canúkkin [šak]íŋi šaknáwš                                      
                                                                                    
               ica·k     canuk-kin šak-iŋi   šak-nawš-ø                             
                                                                                    
               person    horse-LOC 3PLO-look.for 3PLO-let-2simp                     
                                                                                    
               ‘Let people on horses look for them!’                                
                                                                                    
               [iyaˊnĕk mōn ‘nkaˊnē]                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         276                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          18)  iyáŋik mò·n n̥káne                                                   
                                                                                    
               iyaŋ-ik        mo·n      n̥-ka-ne                                    
                                                                                    
               there-ERG.AGNT be.all    2SS-do-GER                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘That there is all that you do.                                      
                                                                                    
               [cakwinēˊ cokwaˊñic yaˊcoktuˊkulet]                                  
                                                                                    
          19)  šakwiné šakwáŋišya šaktúkulat                                        
                                                                                    
               šak-wine  šak-wáŋ-iš=ya            šak-tuk-ul-at                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               3PLO-find 3PLO-go.about-CAUS=and   3PL-bring-3PLS-PRET               
                                                                                    
               ‘They find them, drive them, and bring them.’                        
                                                                                    
               [Icāk cokcaktsăñc konˊuˊhts]                                         
                                                                                    
          20)  iša·k šokšakcáŋš kóŋ úhc                                             
                                                                                    
               iša·k     šok-šak-caŋš   koŋ  ø-uhc                                  
                                                                                    
               person    STH-3PLO-steal sieze 3STATS-be.able                        
                                                                                    
               ‘They can catch the thief.’                                          
                                                                                    
               [Kileˊt-kiˊc yilkē yaˊ yiˊl hiweˊ-u tsikaˊt tsiˊk yaˊtsīˊc keˊne ōˊl]
                                                                                    
          21)  kilétkíš yilkéya yílhiwéw cikát cí·kya cí·š kéne ó·l                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               kiletkiš  yilke=ya  yil-hiwew cikat ci·k=ya  ci·š ke-ne              
                                                                                    
               PN        marry=and day-strong ago two=and   baby have-GER           
                                                                                    
               ó·l                                                                  
                                                                                    
               soon                                                                 
                                                                                    
               ‘Kiletkiš got married two weeks ago, and is to have a baby soon.’    
                                                                                    
               [hăˊc John Annie yilwaiˊtikit]                                       
                                                                                    
          22)  há·š <John><Annie> yilwáytikit                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         277                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ha-iš     <John>    <Annie>   ø-yilway-tikit                         
                                                                                    
               he-foc    PN        PN        3STATS-marry-FUT                       
                                                                                    
               ‘John, he will marry Annie.’                                         
                                                                                    
               [wi caknoˊmc puˊckin wāˊñ aˊñkāˊmctit coˊktokcik]                    
                                                                                    
          23)  wi šaknómš púškin waŋaŋkámštit šóktokšik                             
                                                                                    
               wi   šak-nomš  puškin    waŋ-ø-aŋkamš-tit         šoktokš-ik         
                                                                                    
               my   PL-child  outside   go.about-3STATS-play(pl)-PROG(PL) ball-ERG.INSTR
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘My children are going about outside playing with a ball.’           
                                                                                    
               [cokiōˊl noˊmc hakīˊt cukiōlc-hatkeˊ mōn luˊcĕm taˊlcĕm]             
                                                                                    
          24)  šakyólnómš hakít šakyólšokhatké mo·n lúšim tálšim                    
                                                                                    
               šakyol-nomš hakit šakyol-šokhatke mo·n ø-lu-šim                      
                                                                                    
               male-child their male-clothing all 3STATS-dirt-NOTHING.BUT           
                                                                                    
               ø-tal-šim                                                            
                                                                                    
               3STATS-hole-NOTHING.BUT                                              
                                                                                    
               ‘The boys’ trousers are nothing but dirt and nothing but holes.’     
                                                                                    
               [Tsīˊs wāñ-haihaiˊckit]                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          25)  cí·š waŋhayháyškit                                                   
                                                                                    
               ci·š waŋ-ø-hayhayš-kit                                               
                                                                                    
               baby go.about-3STATS-cry-PROG(SG)                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘The baby goes about crying.’                                        
                                                                                    
               [Hiyeˊn teˊm nimaˊ-utsĕl yaˊkuyak’hoˊ cakaˊtsel]                     
                                                                                    
          26)  hiyén tém nimácelya kuyyatkól šakkácel                               
                                                                                    
               hiyen tem      nima-cel=ya    kuy-hat-kol         šak-ka-cel         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         278                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               pig  yesterday kill-1PLS=and  intestine-REFLEX-stuff 3PLO-do-1PLS    
                                                                                    
               ‘Yesterday we killed a pig and made sausages.’                       
                                                                                    
               [Oˊk ichuˊ pēl haˊ tsanuˊki iteˊ-u oˊkne]                            
                                                                                    
          27)  ók išhú pélháh canúkkin itéwókne                                     
                                                                                    
               ok-ø      iš-hu-ø        ø-pel-hah      canuk-kin itew-ok-ne         
                                                                                    
               come-2SIMP 1PLO-see-2SIMP 3STATS-be.far-NEG horse-LOC ride-come-GER  
                                                                                    
               ‘Come! See us! It is not far to come riding on a horse.’             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [‘Ntoˊl aˊ ‘natnaˊha]                                                
                                                                                    
          28)  n̥tól á n̥hatnáh á                                                   
                                                                                    
               n̥-tol         a    n̥-hatnah      a                                 
                                                                                    
               2SSTATS-be.good Q   2SSTATS-be.how Q                                 
                                                                                    
               ‘Are you well? How are you?’                                         
                                                                                    
          Commentary. Line 1. The word páhw ‘seven’ is written {pá’h} and {pá’hĕ} by Gatschet; only
                                                                                    
          the form páhw-ip ‘seven times’ {pá’hwip} reveals the correct phonemic form. It seems that w in
                                                                                    
          word-final position after a consonant was devoiced, thus pronounced /pahw̥ /. The cognate form
                                                                                    
          in Hiyékiti also seems to have had the form /pahw̥ /, based on the transcription [paghou].
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Line 2. The form [otōˊlco] is a miswriting or mishearing of itólšo, which with vowel weaking
                                                                                    
          would have been pronounced /ətólšʌ/.                                      
                                                                                    
           The gerund nké·tne ‘for you to stay,’ expresses purpose. The gerund expresses purpose in the
                                                                                    
          texts rather than the participle.                                         
                                                                                    
          Line 3. Note the gapped construction with n̥háh á ‘are you not?’ standing in for ók n̥áwš á ‘are
                                                                                    
          you not able to come?’                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         279                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Line 5. The element tukémš is a locative compound meaning ‘row in a boat.’ It is comparable to
                                                                                    
          the compound nuŋké·t ‘to live in a village.’                              
                                                                                    
          Line 8. Here the aorist mode is used describing a situation in the future, since there is no focus
                                                                                    
          on the temporal aspects of the action.                                    
                                                                                    
          Line 9. The first gerund in this line, išaŋkámšne, expresses purpose, ‘we are to play.’ The
                                                                                    
          second gerund išké·tne, expresses intention, ‘we are to have.’ In an interlinear note, Gatschet
                                                                                    
          points out that Tottokš insisted that the gerund ké·tne does not come from ké·t ‘to sit.’ Thus we
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          have to accept that the verb ké ‘to have’ has an irregular gerund, ké·tne, as well as a regular
                                                                                    
          gerund kéne.                                                              
                                                                                    
          Line 10. The phrase púm išháhš was incorrectly glossed in Gatschet’s fieldnotes as ‘we have a
                                                                                    
          dance,’ and this error was carried on by Swanton into the publication. It is clearly ‘we do not
                                                                                    
          have a dance,’ and with the death of the chief mentioned afterwards, it makes sense that a
                                                                                    
          planned dance would have been cancelled.                                  
                                                                                    
          Line 13. This line acts as a supplement to Text 7 which discusses traditional Atakapa medical
                                                                                    
          practices. The fact that traditional Atakapa doctors treated illness by sucking out blood would
                                                                                    
          otherwise be unknown.                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Lines 15-20. These sentences do not make good sense and are not well-coordinated. Gatschet
                                                                                    
          seems to have prepared a series of sentences, and asked for their translation, and Tottokš did her
                                                                                    
          best.                                                                     
                                                                                    
          Lines 15-16. These sentences are ungrammatical. They are translated in the publication “Did
                                                                                    
          you find the horses you lost three weeks ago?” However, the Atakapa consists of three sentences:
                                                                                    
          ‘You find your horses,’ ‘You lost them,’ ‘It happened three weeks ago.’ There is no interrogative
                                                                                    
          element, and there is no coordination between the three sentences. The sentence in the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         280                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          translation clearly was offered to Tottokš to put into Atakapa, and the tacit relative clause
                                                                                    
          confused her, given that the syntax of relative clause equivalents in Atakapa is very different
                                                                                    
          than in English. Based on other, grammatical, sentences, the possible translation of the English
                                                                                    
          would be:                                                                 
                                                                                    
           nakít canúk yílhiwéw cikát lá·t nakšakáłišne šakwinétem á?               
                                                                                    
           nakit canuk yílhiwew cikat la·t nak-šak-ałiš-ne  šak-wine-tem            
                                                                                    
           your horse week    ago  three 2PLSTATS-3PLO-lose-GER 3PLO-find-2PLS      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           a                                                                        
                                                                                    
           Q                                                                        
                                                                                    
           ‘Did you find the horses that you lost three weeks ago?’                 
                                                                                    
          Line 18. This is a relative clause equivalent. A free translation is not provided in the
                                                                                    
          publication. The English original seems to have been ‘That is all you have to do.’ The noun iyáŋ
                                                                                    
          ‘there’ is used in the ergative case as a kind of resumptive pronoun, mó·n is verbalized as ‘to be
                                                                                    
          all,’ and then n̥káne is the relative clause equivalent, ‘that you do.’ It is difficult to assess how
                                                                                    
          grammatical this sentence is, but it seems much closer to what it should be than lines 15 and 16.
                                                                                    
          Line 19. In the publication, this line is translated as a unit with line 17, completely ignoring line
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          18. The two sentences are not congruent, as line 17 is in the aorist mode and line 19 is in the
                                                                                    
          preterite mode. It is possible to conceive of this sentence referring to a present tense if the
                                                                                    
          actions are conceived as being resultative, that is if the unnamed actors have been successful in
                                                                                    
          completing their actions of finding, driving, and bringing.               
                                                                                    
          Line 20. This sentence about a thief is a non sequitur. Line 15 mentions the horses as having
                                                                                    
          been lost, not stolen.                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         281                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Line 21. The fact that this entire text is highly artificial is brought out in this sentence: ‘Kiletkiš
                                                                                    
          got married two weeks ago, and is to have a baby soon.’ Kiletkiš is noted as being the mother of
                                                                                    
          Tottokš, who at the time she worked with Gatschet was 55 years old. Her mother, had she been
                                                                                    
          living, would have been over 70, and not about to have any babies.        
                                                                                    
          Line 22. The English original of this sentence seems to have been “John will marry Annie,” and
                                                                                    
          given what Gatschet wrote in his field notes, it gave Tottokš and himself a bit of trouble. Part of
                                                                                    
          the problem is that Atakapa has two verbs ‘to marry,’ yilké and yilwáy, the first being intransitive
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          and the second being transitive. Gatschet seems to have thought that the first meant ‘for a
                                                                                    
          woman to get married,’ and the second, ‘for a man to get married,’ based on his interlinear
                                                                                    
          glosses with Latin nubere and ducere. The sentence first started out as {Hāsh Annie yilkétikit}
                                                                                    
          then Gatschet drew a line through yilkétikit and replaced it with {yilwáitikit John}, then realizing
                                                                                    
          that yilway, as he assumed, meant for a man to get married, scratched out John, and inserted it
                                                                                    
          between Hāsh and Annie, so that it meant ‘He, John, will marry Annie,’ not ‘She, Annie, will
                                                                                    
          marry John,’ as it originally did. Further examples show that if the person to whom one is
                                                                                    
          getting married must be expressed after using yilké, then the noun referring to that person is put
                                                                                    
          in the directional case.                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Line 24. The English original of this sentence was probably, ‘The boys’ trousers are full of dirt
                                                                                    
          and holes.’ The Atakapa devised the word šok-hat-ké ‘the thing one has on oneself,’ to cover the
                                                                                    
          concept of Western clothing, but they did not make the gender distinctions so important to
                                                                                    
          English speakers (blouse/shirt; dress/trousers, etc.) In addition, the Atakapa word nómš ‘child’
                                                                                    
          does not make gender distinctions. Thus, in translating the sentence Tottokš had to say “The
                                                                                    
          male children, their male clothing.” Furthermore, at first, she started to translate the rest of the
                                                                                    
          sentence with {lú ntál} lún̥ tál ‘mud and holes,’ and then switched to the more Atakapa
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         282                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          expression lúšim tálšim ‘they are nothing but mud and nothing but holes,’ after which Gatschet
                                                                                    
          scratched out {lú ntál}.                                                  
                                                                                    
          Line 26. This sentence is an aorist expressing past time, as shown by the adverb tém,
                                                                                    
          ‘yesterday.’                                                              
                                                                                    
          Line 27. The gerund here is acting as an adverbial modifier: pélháh ‘it is not far’ canúkkin
                                                                                    
          itéwókne ‘coming riding on a horse.’                                      
                                                                                    
          Text 5. Biographical sketch of Kišmok. With this text, found on pages 161-163 of Gatschet’s
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          field notes, we return to natural texts. It talks about Kišmok, the cousin of Tottokš and mother of
                                                                                    
          Kišyuc. Gatschet entitled it “Biographic Notice of Ponponne.” Ponponne was the French
                                                                                    
          nickname of Kišmok (probably bonbon ‘sugar-plum,’ very likely an ironic reference to her sharp
                                                                                    
          personality). As Ponponne she appears in the 1870 United States census, living on Lake Prien,
                                                                                    
          with her daughter Louison and grandchildren Adele and Celanie13 and Celanie’s husband
                                                                                    
          Narcisse14 and their two sons. If the census records are anywhere near correct, Kišmok was born
                                                                                    
          around 1805.                                                              
                                                                                    
          wé·t kiš mók                                                              
                                                                                    
           kic mókn̥ <Ponponne> yóŋšulat                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          tákapo kìc yukhíti núŋkin ké·tn̥tat                                       
                                                                                    
           yukhíti túl tólpot inó                                                   
                                                                                    
            túl téw iyéhicon                                                        
                                                                                    
          iyáŋ ké·tn̥ tat yukíts túl maynóy išicyúckin                              
                                                                                    
          há·š hipá háhšat hiúhc atkákiya                                           
                                                                                    
           néšpalpaláŋkin nuŋkè·tn̥tat                                              
                                                                                    
          ikunyúc šaktikáw                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         283                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           šokká hiwéw šityáŋ líliya šokšakyíkšya                                   
                                                                                    
            šokwákn̥ á·l payókya                                                    
                                                                                    
              pílkin tihtšokšílkit                                                  
                                                                                    
          yukhíti ahinákka hatitólšháhat                                            
                                                                                    
          komók héw hoktanúk ká šakkáya šokšakkíkšat                                
                                                                                    
          kic mókatya yo·lat                                                        
                                                                                    
           kicá·k káwya waŋšakpámkóhya šakhéwš                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          šokómn̥ canúk háhšat                                                      
                                                                                    
          nómš lá·t kéat šakyól cí·k kic tanúk                                      
                                                                                    
           hiyo·l wášiŋíti ha é·ŋ <Toussaint>                                       
                                                                                    
            hiyo·l hicón ha é·ŋ <Ursin>                                             
                                                                                    
              ha yukhíti é·ŋ koná·š                                                 
                                                                                    
               iškišíl é·ŋ <Louison>                                                
                                                                                    
                 yukhíti é·ŋ yoyótn̥ kišyúc                                         
                                                                                    
          ha šaknómšya ha šakníl šók héw šakwánc úhcat                              
                                                                                    
           icá·k šokwašwášiŋ kúltan káulat ká                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            yokón šakyókat hakítot                                                  
                                                                                    
          ilú wošpé hálhimatól atkáki káwat                                         
                                                                                    
           ilú wošpe laccí·k hináka wášiŋ                                           
                                                                                    
            išláwš tá·tik káwatya                                                   
                                                                                    
            ha núŋkin himó·šulat                                                    
                                                                                    
          hanúk iyáŋ himó·štíht                                                     
                                                                                    
           yukhíti šakhimo·šne·kinháh                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         284                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kištó·t ha níl                                                            
                                                                                    
           yoyót ha iškišíl                                                         
                                                                                    
            háhuwi·t káwat á núŋkin                                                 
                                                                                    
             šoké·š hoktanúk šakkáat                                                
                                                                                    
              kiwílš šakhimo·šne·kin himó·šulat.                                    
                                                                                    
          My cousin was a short woman;                                              
                                                                                    
           they called her Short-Woman and Ponponne.                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          She was an Atakapa woman, and she used to live in an Indian village       
                                                                                    
           on the east side of Lake Prien;                                          
                                                                                    
           Lake Charles is smaller.                                                 
                                                                                    
          There she used to dwell while we grew up on the other side of the lake.   
                                                                                    
          She did not have a husband from the time I knew her,                      
                                                                                    
           She lived in the village in a split-plank house.                         
                                                                                    
          She looks like one of the young people.                                   
                                                                                    
           She works hard;                                                          
                                                                                    
             she softens green Spanish moss, and she sells,                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
              and brings back bread and meat,                                       
                                                                                    
              and she keeps on lying on the bed sewing.                             
                                                                                    
          She did not dress herself like an Indian.                                 
                                                                                    
          She made different makes of baskets and sold them.                        
                                                                                    
          She was a short woman and an ill-tempered one;                            
                                                                                    
           she got drunk and wanted to go about beating people and cursing them,    
                                                                                    
          She did not have cows or horses.                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         285                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           She had three children, two men and one woman.                           
                                                                                    
            Her older son’s name is Toussaint.                                      
                                                                                    
              Her younger son’s name is Ursin; his Indian name is Kona·š.           
                                                                                    
               Her daughter’s name is Louison;                                      
                                                                                    
               her Indian names are Yoyot and Kišyuc.                               
                                                                                    
          She was able to tell her children and her grandchildren many things;      
                                                                                    
           the old things that people did long ago.                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
             She sang songs to them.                                                
                                                                                    
          She died fourteen years ago;                                              
                                                                                    
           she was about sixty years old.                                           
                                                                                    
            She died of yellow fever,                                               
                                                                                    
              and they buried her in her village.                                   
                                                                                    
               She alone lies buried there.                                         
                                                                                    
               She is not in the Indian cemetery.                                   
                                                                                    
          Kišto·t, her grandchild,                                                  
                                                                                    
           Yoyot’s daughter,                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            had died previously in this town.                                       
                                                                                    
              They had different illnesses.                                         
                                                                                    
              They buried her in the white people’s cemetery.                       
                                                                                    
               [Wēt Kic Mōk Kic Mōk n Ponponne i-oˊñculat]                          
                                                                                    
          1)   wé·t kiš mók kicmókn̥ <Ponponne> yóŋšulat                            
                                                                                    
               we·t        kiš     ø-mok          kic-mók=n̥     <Ponponne>         
                                                                                    
               woman’s.sister woman 3STATS-be.short woman-short=and PN              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         286                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               yóŋš-ul-at                                                           
                                                                                    
               call-3PLS-PRET                                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘My cousin was a short woman; they called her Short-Woman and Ponponne.’
                                                                                    
               [Taˊkapo kic yukiˊti nuˊnkin kēˊt’ntat Yuk’hiˊti Tuˊl toˊlpot inoˊ Tuˊl Teˊ-u iyeˊ edson]
                                                                                    
          2)   tákapa kìc yukhíti núŋkin ké·tn̥tat yukhíti túl tólpot inó túl téw iyéhicon
                                                                                    
               takapa    ø-kìc          yukhiti nuŋ-kin ke·t-n̥t-at   yukhiti       
                                                                                    
               Atakapa   3STATS-be.woman Indian village-LOC dwell-CONTIN-PRET Indian
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               tul  tolpot ino tul tew       ø-iye-hicon                            
                                                                                    
               lake east side lake upstream  3STATS-be.more-be.small                
                                                                                    
               ‘She was an Atakapa woman, and she used to live in an Indian village on the east
                                                                                    
               side of Lake Prien (Indian Lake)15; Lake Charles (Upstream16 Lake) is smaller.’
                                                                                    
               [Yaˊñ kēˊtntat yukiˊts tuˊl ma inoˊ-i icitsyuˊtskin]                 
                                                                                    
          3)   iyáŋ ké·tn̥tat yukíts túl maynóy išicyúckin                          
                                                                                    
               iyaŋ ke·t-n̥t-at    yukit-š   tul  maynoy                            
                                                                                    
               there dwell-CONTIN-PRET we-FOC lake other.side                       
                                                                                    
               iš-icyuc-kin                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               1PLSTATS-grow.up-WHEN                                                
                                                                                    
               ‘There she used to dwell while we grew up on the other side of the lake.’
                                                                                    
               [hāc ipaˊ hāˊxcĕt (h)iuˊxts atkaˊki]                                 
                                                                                    
          4)   há·š hipá háhšat hiúhc atkáki                                        
                                                                                    
               ha-iš     hipa      ø-hahš-at           hi-uhc     atkaki            
                                                                                    
               she-FOC   husband   3STATS-not.have-PRET 1SSTATS-know since          
                                                                                    
               ‘She did not have a husband from the time I knew her.’               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         287                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [neˊc palpaˊl aˊnkin nûˊn-kētntat]                                   
                                                                                    
          5)   néšpalpaláŋkin nuŋkè·tn̥tat                                          
                                                                                    
               neš-pal,pal-aŋ-kin  nuŋ-ke·t-n̥t-at                                  
                                                                                    
               wood-,REDUP,flat-house-LOC village-dwell-CONTIN-PRET                 
                                                                                    
               ‘She lived in the village in a split-plank house.’                   
                                                                                    
               [Ikunyuˊts caktikaˊ-u]                                               
                                                                                    
          6)   ikunyúc šaktikáw                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ikunyuc   šak-ø-tikaw                                                
                                                                                    
               young.person 3PLO-3STATS-look.like                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘She looks like one of the young people.’                            
                                                                                    
               [cokaˊ-hiweˊ-u cithaˊñ liˊl[i] yaˊ cokcukyiˊkc yaˊ cukwaˊk ‘n āˊl pai-oˊk yaˊ
                                                                                    
          7)   šokká hiwéw šityáŋ líliya šokšakkíkšya šokwákn̥ a·l payókya          
                                                                                    
               pīˊlkin ti(xt) coxkciˊukit]                                          
                                                                                    
               pílkin tíhtšokšílkit                                                 
                                                                                    
               šok=ka-ø  hiwew     šit-yaŋ        lili-ø=ya šokšakyikš-ø=ya         
                                                                                    
               thing=do-3S strongly Spanish.moss-green soften-3S=and sell-3S=and    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               šokwak=n̥ a·l       pay-ok-ø=ya    pil-kin                           
                                                                                    
               bread=and meat      BACK-come-3S=and bed-LOC                         
                                                                                    
               ø-tiht-šok=šil-kit                                                   
                                                                                    
               3STATS-lie(sg)-thing=sew-PROG                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘She works hard; she softens green Spanish moss and she sells, and brings back bread
                                                                                    
               and meat, and she keeps on lying on the bed sewing.’                 
                                                                                    
               [Yukiˊti o-inaˊka (h)atitōˊlc haˊhat]                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         288                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          8)   yukhíti ahinákka hatitólšháhat                                       
                                                                                    
               yukhíti   ahinakka  hat-itolš-ø-hah-at                               
                                                                                    
               Indian    like      REFLEX-arrange-3SS-NEG-PRET                      
                                                                                    
               ‘She did not dress herself like an Indian.’                          
                                                                                    
               [Komoˊk heˊ-u oˊk tanuˊka cakaˊ yaˊ cokcakīˊkcat]                    
                                                                                    
          9)   komókhéw hoktanúk ká šakkáya šokšakkíkšat                            
                                                                                    
               komok-hew hoktanuk  ka   šak-ka=ya      šokšakyikš-ø-at              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               basket-PL different made 3PLO-make=and  sell-3SS-PRET                
                                                                                    
               ‘She made different makes of baskets and sold them.’                 
                                                                                    
               [Kic moˊkat yaˊ yoˊlĕt kitsāk kaˊ-u yaˊ waˊñ-cakpaˊmkoh yaˊ cak’heˊ-uc]
                                                                                    
          10)  kiš mókatya yó·lat; kicá·k káwya wáŋšakpámkóhya šakhéwš              
                                                                                    
               kiš       ø-mok-at=ya         ø-yo·l-at                kica·k        
                                                                                    
               woman     3STATS-be.short-PRET=and 3STATS-be.ill.tempered-PRET       
                                                                                    
               whiskey                                                              
                                                                                    
               ø-kaw=ya       waŋ-šak-ø-pam-koh=ya               šak-hewš           
                                                                                    
               3STATS-die(sg)=and go.about-3PLOBJ-3STATS-beat-DESID=and 3PLOBJ-curse
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘She was a short woman and an ill-tempered one; she got drunk and wanted to
                                                                                    
               go about beating people and cursing them.’                           
                                                                                    
               [cikoˊm ‘n tsanuˊk haˊxcĕt]                                          
                                                                                    
          11)  šokómn̥ canúk háhšat                                                 
                                                                                    
               šokom=n   canuk     ø-hahš-at                                        
                                                                                    
               cow=and   horse     3STATS-not.have-PRET                             
                                                                                    
               ‘She did not have cows or horses.’                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         289                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [noˊmc lāt keˊat cakiōˊl tsīk kic tanuˊk]                            
                                                                                    
          12)  nómš lá·t kéat šakyól cí·k kiš tanúk                                 
                                                                                    
               nomš la·t ø-ke-at        šakyól    cí·k kiš       tanúk              
                                                                                    
               child three 3STATS-have-PRET male  two  woman     one                
                                                                                    
               ‘She had three children, two men and one woman.’                     
                                                                                    
               [hiōl waˊcin iˊti haˊ ēˊñ Toussaint]                                 
                                                                                    
          13)  hiyo·l wášiŋíti ha é·ŋ <Toussaint>                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               hiyo·l    ø-wášiŋ-íti              ha   é·ŋ  <Toussaint>             
                                                                                    
               son       3STATS-be.so.old-be.in.front his name PN                   
                                                                                    
               ‘Her older son’s name is Toussaint.’                                 
                                                                                    
               [hiōl idsonˊ haˊ ēñ Ursin haˊ Yuk’hiˊti ēñ Konāˊc]                   
                                                                                    
          14)  hiyo·l hicón ha é·ŋ <Ursin> ha yukhíti é·ŋ koná·š                    
                                                                                    
               hiyo·l    ø-hicon        ha   e·ŋ  <Ursin>   ha   yukhiti            
                                                                                    
               son       3STATS-be.small his name PN        his  Indian             
                                                                                    
               e·ŋ  kona·š                                                          
                                                                                    
               name PN                                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘Her younger son’s name is Ursin; his Indian name is Kona·š.’        
                                                                                    
               [ickiciˊl ēñ Louison Yuk’hiˊti ēñ Yoyoˊt ‘n Kic Yuˊts]               
                                                                                    
          15)  iškišíl é·ŋ <Louison> yukhíti é·ŋ yoyótn kišyúc                      
                                                                                    
               iškišíl   é·ŋ  <Louison> yukhíti   é·ŋ  yoyót=n   kišyúc             
                                                                                    
               daughter  name PN        Indian    name PN=and    PN                 
                                                                                    
               ‘Her daughter’s name is Louison; her Indian names are Yoyót and Kišyúc.’
                                                                                    
          Lines as directed by Gatschet to be ordered:                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         290                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               {Há shaknómsh yá ha shaknīˊl shok hé-u shakwánts ú’htsăt}            
                                                                                    
          16)  ha šaknómšya ha šakníl šok héw šakwánc úhcat                         
                                                                                    
               ha   šak-nomš=ya    ha   šak-nil        šok  hew  šak-wanc           
                                                                                    
               her  PL-child=and   her  PL-grandchild  thing many 3PLO-tell         
                                                                                    
               ø-uhc-at                                                             
                                                                                    
               3STATS-be.able-PRET                                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘She was able to tell her children and her grandchildren many things.’
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               {ishāk shok washwáshing kúltan ká-ulat ká}                           
                                                                                    
          17)  icá·k šok wašwášiŋ kúltan káulat ká                                  
                                                                                    
               ica·k     šok  ,waš,wašiŋ     kultan    ka-ul-at       ka            
                                                                                    
               person    thing ,REDUP,be.so.old long.ago do-3PLS-PRET done          
                                                                                    
               ‘the old things that people did long ago.’                           
                                                                                    
               {Yokón shakyókat hakīˊt oˊt}                                         
                                                                                    
          18)  yokón šakyókat hakítot                                               
                                                                                    
               yokon     šak-yok-at     hakit-ot                                    
                                                                                    
               song      3PLO-sing-PRET they-DIR                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘She sang songs to them.’                                            
                                                                                    
          Lines as published by Swanton:                                            
                                                                                    
               [Cok heˊ-u cakwaˊnts uˊxtsăt]                                        
                                                                                    
          16x) šokhéw šakwánc úhcat                                                 
                                                                                    
               šok-hew   šak-wanc  ø-uhc-at                                         
                                                                                    
               thing-PL  3PLO-tell 3STATS-be.able-PRET                              
                                                                                    
               ‘She was able to tell them things.’                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         291                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [icāˊk cok wacwaˊciñ kuˊltan kaˊ-ulat kaˊ]                           
                                                                                    
          17x) icá·k šokwašwášiŋ kúltan káulat ká                                   
                                                                                    
               ica·k     šok-,waš,wašiŋ      kultan    ka-ul-at       ka            
                                                                                    
               person    STH-,REDUP,be.so.old long.ago do-3PLS-PRET   done          
                                                                                    
               ‘the old things that people did long ago.’                           
                                                                                    
               [haˊ caknoˊmc yaˊ ha cakniˊl cakyoˊkat yokoˊn hakīˊt oˊt]            
                                                                                    
          18x) ha šaknómšya ha šakníl šakyókat yokón hakítot                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ha   šak-nomš=ya    ha   šak-nil   šak-yok-at     yokon              
                                                                                    
               her  PL-child=and   her  PL-grandchild 3PLO-sing-PRET song           
                                                                                    
               hakit-ot                                                             
                                                                                    
               they-DIR                                                             
                                                                                    
               ‘Her children and her grandchildren, songs she sang to them.’        
                                                                                    
               [Iluˊ woc-peˊ haˊl imatoˊl (a)tkaki kaˊwat iluˊ wocpeˊ latsīˊk hinaˊka wăˊciñ]
                                                                                    
          19)  ilú wošpé hálhimatól atkáki káwat ilú wošpé laccí·k hinákka wášiŋ    
                                                                                    
               ilu  wošpe     hal-himatol    atkaki    ø-kaw-at       ilu           
                                                                                    
               year be.ten    again-be.four  since     3STATS-die-PRET year         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               wošpe     lacci·k   hinakka   ø-wašiŋ                                
                                                                                    
               be.ten    be.six    like      3STATS-be.so.old                       
                                                                                    
               ‘She died fourteen years ago; she was about sixty years old.’        
                                                                                    
               [īclaˊuc taˊtik kaˊwat yaˊ haˊ nuˊnkin imoˊculat]                    
                                                                                    
          20)  hišláwš tá·tik káwatya ha núŋkin himó·šulat                          
                                                                                    
               hišlawš   ta·t-ik        ø-kaw-at=ya         ha   nuŋ-kin            
                                                                                    
               fever     yellow-ERG.INSTR 3SSTATS-die-PRET=and her village-LOC      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         292                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               himo·š-ul-at                                                         
                                                                                    
               bury-3PLS-PRET                                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘She died of yellow fever, and they buried her in her village.’      
                                                                                    
               [Haˊ nuˊk iyāˊñ imōˊcti(xt) yuk’hiˊti cakimōc-neˊkin haˊ]            
                                                                                    
          21)  hánuk iyáŋ himó·štíht yukhíti šakhimo·šné·kinháh                     
                                                                                    
               ha-nuk    iyaŋ ø-himo·š-tiht  yukhiti   ø-šakhimo·šne·-kin-hah       
                                                                                    
               she-alone there 3STATS-be.buried-lie Indian 3STATS-be.cemetery-LOC-NEG
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘She alone lies buried there. She is not in the Indian cemetery.’    
                                                                                    
               [Kic Tōt haˊ nīl Yoyoˊt haˊ ickiciˊl haˊhu īt kaˊwat aˊ nuˊnkin]     
                                                                                    
          22)  kištó·t ha níl yoyót ha iškišíl háhuwi·t káwat á núŋkin              
                                                                                    
               kišto·t ha nil      yoyot ha  iškišil   hahuwi·t                     
                                                                                    
               PN   her  grandchild PN  her  daughter  previously                   
                                                                                    
               ø-kaw-at       a    nuŋ-kin                                          
                                                                                    
               3STATS-die-PRET this village-LOC                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘Kišto·t, her grandchild, Yoyot’s daughter, had died previously in this village.’
                                                                                    
               [cok’hēˊc oktanuˊk cokaˊat]                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          23)  šoké·š hoktanúk šakkáat                                              
                                                                                    
               šoke·š    hoktanuk  šak-ka-ø-at                                      
                                                                                    
               illness   different 3PLO-do-3SS-PRET                                 
                                                                                    
               ‘They had different illnesses,’ lit. ‘A different illness did them.’ 
                                                                                    
               [Kiwiˊlc cakhimōˊcnēˊnkin imoˊculat]                                 
                                                                                    
          24)  kiwílš šakhimo·šné·kin himó·šulat                                    
                                                                                    
               kiwilš    šakhimo·šne·-kin himo·šulat                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         293                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               white.person cemetery-LOC bury-3PLS-PRET                             
                                                                                    
               ‘They buried her in the white people’s cemetery.’                    
                                                                                    
          Commentary. This text was analyzed and translated by Swanton in his sketch of Atakapa
                                                                                    
          grammar (1929:147), and retranslated for the 1932 publication. Occasionally in collecting a text,
                                                                                    
          Gatschet would write words and phrases out of proper order, and then, when he went back over it
                                                                                    
          with his consultant, would make marginal notes about how the phrase actually should be ordered,
                                                                                    
          with subscript numbers or notes. While Swanton was usually very careful about following
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Gatschet’s notes regarding proper word order, he did not do so in this text, which changed the
                                                                                    
          meaning of part of it radically. This is most evident in lines 16-18.     
                                                                                    
          Lines 16-18 as published:                                                 
                                                                                    
          šók héw šakwánc úhcat                                                     
                                                                                    
          icá·k šok wašwášiŋ kúltan káulat ká                                       
                                                                                    
          ha šaknómšya ha šakníl šakyókat yokón hakítot                             
                                                                                    
          Lines 16-18 as directed by Gatschet to be ordered:                        
                                                                                    
          ha šaknómšya ha šakníl šók héw šakwánc úhcat                              
                                                                                    
          icá·k šok wašwášiŋ kúltan káulat ká                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          yokón šakyókat hakítot                                                    
                                                                                    
          Translations:                                                             
                                                                                    
          Swanton (1929):                                                           
                                                                                    
               She could tell many things that men had done long ago.               
                                                                                    
               About them she sang songs to her children and grandchildren.         
                                                                                    
          Swanton (1932):                                                           
                                                                                    
               She could tell to her children and her grandchildren many things about what
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         294                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                happened in olden times.                                            
                                                                                    
               She sang songs to them.                                              
                                                                                    
          Based on Gatschet:                                                        
                                                                                    
               She was able to tell her children and her grandchildren many things, 
                                                                                    
               the old things that people did long ago.                             
                                                                                    
               She sang songs to them.                                              
                                                                                    
          Swanton’s 1932 translation is closer to what Gatschet had intended; however, Swanton never re-
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          edited the text as Gatschet had directed.                                 
                                                                                    
          Line 1. Even though Kišmok was a first cousin to Tottokš; here she is called wé·t, or ‘woman’s
                                                                                    
          sister.’ This goes along with the statement in Text 1 that cousins were considered to be brothers
                                                                                    
          and sisters. The daughter of Kišmok, Kišyuc, Gatschet’s other consultant, although a first cousin
                                                                                    
          once removed of Tottokš, was older than she, suggesting that the unnamed mother of Kišmok
                                                                                    
          was the eldest daughter of Šukuhuy (see Text 6).                          
                                                                                    
          Line 3. The focus form of the pronoun ‘we’ yukíts, is used here, as the focus of the narrative
                                                                                    
          switches from Kišmok to the family of Tottokš.                            
                                                                                    
          Lines 6-7. The mode of the narrative switches in these two lines from the preterite to the aorist.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          The stylistic purpose seems to be to make the narrative more vivid, as Tottokš describes her
                                                                                    
          cousin as if she were still living.                                       
                                                                                    
          Line 7. There are several mishearings in this line. The first is [cithaˊñ] for ‘Spanish moss.’ This
                                                                                    
          is actually šit yáŋ ‘green Spanish moss.’ The noun šit is a mass noun and requires a plural
                                                                                    
          adjective (eg. šit mélme·l ‘black Spanish moss’). However, the verb yáŋ ‘to be green’ explicitly
                                                                                    
          lacks a plural form. The Indians in Louisiana had a technology for spinning and weaving
                                                                                    
          Spanish moss, which was used to make saddle blankets and mattresses among other items. The
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         295                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          next mishearing is [liˊl] líl ‘to be soft’ for líli, ‘to make something soft.’ The final i of the verb
                                                                                    
          seems to have been missed, given that it was followed by the clitic =ya ‘and.’
                                                                                    
           The published form [ti(xt)] was originally written {tíu tí} and when Gatschet went back over
                                                                                    
          the text, he scratched out the {tíu} and added {‘ht} in parentheses after {tí} to show that he had
                                                                                    
          missed hearing it. His parentheses partially covered the accent mark, so in the publication
                                                                                    
          [ti(xt)] was printed without its accent, and not as tíht as Gatschet intended.
                                                                                    
           Finally, the form [coxkciˊwkit] shows an example of preaspiration in the prefix šok- and the
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          mishearing of the l in the verb sokšíl, ‘to be sewing,’ as w.             
                                                                                    
          Line 9. The word hoktanúk ‘to be different’ is derived from the numeral tanúk ‘one,’ verbalized
                                                                                    
          and with the reciprocal prefix hok- ‘it is alone is regards to others.’ The verb šokšakyíkš ‘to sell’
                                                                                    
          is irregularly derived from šakyíkš ‘to buy,’ and ultimately from yíkš ‘to pay someone
                                                                                    
          something.’                                                               
                                                                                    
          Line 10. There is a nice example here of a complex compound desiderative with omitted
                                                                                    
          inflection in the coordinate verb. Examples such as these suggest that at the time Gatschet did
                                                                                    
          his field work, Atakapa was not yet beginning to show signs of language death.
                                                                                    
          Line 11. By the late 19th century, the Atakapa had adopted animal husbandry, along with
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          agriculture (Post, 1962:241-42). If they were at all like the Koasati of the same period, horses
                                                                                    
          and cattle were an indication of wealth. This being so, Tottokš suggests that her cousin was not a
                                                                                    
          wealthy woman.                                                            
                                                                                    
          Line 15. This line puts Gatschet’s first consultant, Kišyuc, in her family context. It is interesting
                                                                                    
          that she had more than one Indian name.                                   
                                                                                    
          Lines 16-18; 16a-18a. The mis-ordering of these sentences by Swanton is discussed at the
                                                                                    
          beginning of the commentary on this text.                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         296                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Line 19. There is a slight meaning difference between wáši ‘to be old,’ and wášiŋ ‘to be so old.’
                                                                                    
          Note the forms wášwaši ‘to be old, plural subject’ and wášinnakwášiŋ ‘to become very old.’
                                                                                    
          Line 20. In taking down the dictation, Gatschet asked if, instead of núŋkin ‘in (her) village,’ if
                                                                                    
          one could say kánkin ín (her) home,’ and was given a definite no. Atakapa makes a definite
                                                                                    
          distinction between áŋ ‘house, the building,’ and kán ‘the concept of home,’ which is not so
                                                                                    
          clearly made in English.                                                  
                                                                                    
          Line 21. Here there is a verbalization of a noun phrase in the locative case: yukhíti
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          šakhimo·šné·kinháh ‘she is not in the Indian cemetery.’                   
                                                                                    
          Line 22. This is the only textual reference to any of the children of Kišyuc; however on page 45
                                                                                    
          of Gatschet’s field notes, the name of another daughter, Kiškicaw, and the name of her son,
                                                                                    
          Nolkop, are given.                                                        
                                                                                    
          Line 23. Even though the verb hoktanúk appeared previously in line 9 with the meaning
                                                                                    
          ‘different,’ here Gatschet mistranslated it as ‘the same.’ Actually, ‘to be the same’ is expressed
                                                                                    
          by the verb hoktikáw from the verb tikáw ‘to be similar’ and the reciprocal prefix hok-. Perhaps
                                                                                    
          Tottokš meant to say hoktikáw, but said hoktanúk by accident.             
                                                                                    
          Text 6. Notes on the family of Tottokš. This is another biographical text, one in which Tottokš
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          talks about her grandfather, mother, and stepfather. It is found on pages 166-168 of Gatschet’s
                                                                                    
          field notes. Gatschet entitled it “Chief Shukuhuˊ-i and Cyprien” although it is as much about her
                                                                                    
          mother Kiletkiš (here unnamed) as it is about the two men. Šukuhuy17, grandfather of Tottokš,
                                                                                    
          died about 1854, while her step-father Cyprien died during the Civil War in 1864.
                                                                                    
          wi kulšá šúkuhuy yukhíti šokóyat tákapa óci                               
                                                                                    
          inkilíš táy óc núŋ ké·tn̥ tat túl téw óci                                 
                                                                                    
          hálkin cípšat yukhíti túlot                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         297                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           iyáŋ wášinnakwášiŋ                                                       
                                                                                    
          hináka ilú wošpé lá·t atkáki káwat                                        
                                                                                    
           hiláy tanúk kéat ha é·ŋ <Mary Ann>                                       
                                                                                    
            iškišíl nít kéat hiyó·l háhšat                                          
                                                                                    
          wi oké·t hicónot kinéat                                                   
                                                                                    
           ha ité·t hoktiwé·tóhulat tik nómš lá·t kéat                              
                                                                                    
          wi kulša káwkin ya há·š yilké                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           túl maynóy cípšatya išicyúcišat                                          
                                                                                    
          yukít ité·tpél <Cyprien> iša·k tólat yukít nómšot                         
                                                                                    
           išyucyucya tanúkip šoháh išpácháhat                                      
                                                                                    
            wí·š wi ité·t hiyanyánháhšat                                            
                                                                                    
              paytólušat wíot                                                       
                                                                                    
          hiyúckin há·š okwáŋšot tíšatya káwat                                      
                                                                                    
           wi oké·t máŋ iláŋwáŋn̥tat                                                
                                                                                    
            tikhúkóhat káwháhštán tíš áwšat                                         
                                                                                    
          tanukip tíšat tikpáyat                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kawkáw kášik iših áwšat                                                  
                                                                                    
          yukít nómšsim túhcel yukít nuk                                            
                                                                                    
           ití tanúkip yíl tutnen ó·l paymóhat                                      
                                                                                    
            yukíts iššaccíškišat yukít oké·t húne                                   
                                                                                    
              payákš tíškóhat yukíts tíšne išóŋšat                                  
                                                                                    
               ké·tne námcel tíšháhšne                                              
                                                                                    
          My grandfather, Šukuhuy, was an Indian chief over the Atakapa.            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         298                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          He used to live in a village right on English Bayou, over Lake Charles.   
                                                                                    
          Afterwards he moved to Lake Prien.                                        
                                                                                    
           There he grew to be very old.                                            
                                                                                    
            He died about thirty years ago.                                         
                                                                                    
          He had one wife; her name was Mary Ann                                    
                                                                                    
           He had five daughters; he had no sons.                                   
                                                                                    
            My mother was next to youngest.                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
              She and her father dwelt together until she had three children.       
                                                                                    
          When my grandfather died,                                                 
                                                                                    
           then she married and moved to the other side of the lake, and raised us. 
                                                                                    
          Our step-father Cyprien was a good man to us children.                    
                                                                                    
           He raised us and never whipped us even once.                             
                                                                                    
            I did not fear my father.                                               
                                                                                    
            He was generous to me.                                                  
                                                                                    
          When I was grown, he went to the war and died.                            
                                                                                    
           My mother kept on going about mourning for a long time.                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            She wanted to go and see him before he died, but she was unable to go.  
                                                                                    
              One time she went; she went and returned.                             
                                                                                    
              Because of the high water she was not able to cross.                  
                                                                                    
          It was nothing but us children; we stayed there all by ourselves.         
                                                                                    
           One night, just before daybreak, she returned back.                      
                                                                                    
            We were glad to see our mother.                                         
                                                                                    
              She wanted to go back.                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         299                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               We did not want her to go.                                           
                                                                                    
               We begged her to stay and not to go.                                 
                                                                                    
               [wi kulcaˊ Cuˊkuhui yuk’hiˊti cox̥ koˊyat Taˊkapa oˊtse]             
                                                                                    
          1)   wi kulšá šúkuhuy yukhíti šokóyat tákapa óci                          
                                                                                    
               wi   kulša     šukuhuy   yukhiti   ø-šokoy-at     takapa             
                                                                                    
               my   grandfather PN      Indian    3STATS-be.chief-PRET Atakapa      
                                                                                    
               oci                                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               over                                                                 
                                                                                    
               ‘My grandfather, Šukuhuy, was an Indian chief over the Atakapa.’     
                                                                                    
               [Inkiliˊc taˊ-i oˊts nûˊn kēˊt’ntat Tuˊl Teˊ-u oˊtse]                
                                                                                    
          2)   inkilíš táy óc núŋké·tn̥tat túl téw óci                              
                                                                                    
               inkiliš   tay  oc        nuŋ-ke·t-n̥t-at                             
                                                                                    
               English   river right.on village-dwell-CONTIN-PRET                   
                                                                                    
               tul  tew       oci                                                   
                                                                                    
               lake upstream  over                                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘He used to live in a village right on English Bayou, over Lake Charles.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Haˊlkin tsīˊpcat Yuk’hiˊti Tuˊl oˊt]                                
                                                                                    
          3)   hálkin cípšat yukhíti túlot                                          
                                                                                    
               halkin    cipš-ø-at      yukhiti   tul-ot                            
                                                                                    
               afterwards move-3SS-PRET Indian    lake-DIR                          
                                                                                    
               ‘Afterwards he moved to Lake Prien (Indian Lake).’                   
                                                                                    
               [Īyaˊñ waˊcin nak waˊcin]                                            
                                                                                    
          4)   iyáŋ wášinnakwášiŋ                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         300                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               iyaŋ ø-wašiŋ,nak,wašiŋ                                               
                                                                                    
               there 3STATS-REDUP,INFIX,be.so.old                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘There he grew to be very old.’                                      
                                                                                    
               [hinaˊka iluˊ wocpeˊ laˊt atkaˊki kaˊwat]                            
                                                                                    
          5)   hinákka ilú wošpé lá·t atkáki káwat                                  
                                                                                    
               hinakka   ilu  wošpe la·t atkaki   ø-kaw-at                          
                                                                                    
               like      year ten  three ago      3STATS-die-PRET                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘He died about thirty years ago.’                                    
                                                                                    
               [Hilaˊ-i taˊnuk keˊat ha ēˊñ Mary Ann]                               
                                                                                    
          6)   hiláy tanúk kéat ha é·ŋ <Mary Ann>                                   
                                                                                    
               hilay tanuk ø-ke-at      ha   e·ŋ  <Mary Ann>                        
                                                                                    
               wife one  3STATS-have-PRET her name PN                               
                                                                                    
               ‘He had one wife; her name was Mary Ann.’                            
                                                                                    
               [Ickiciˊl nīt keˊat. Hiōˊl hāˊxcat]                                  
                                                                                    
          7)   iškišíl ní·t kéat hiyó·l háhšat                                      
                                                                                    
               iškišil   ni·t ø-ke-at        hiyo·l    ø-hahš-at                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               daughter  five 3STATS-have-PRET son     3STATS-not.have-PRET         
                                                                                    
               ‘He had five daughters; he had no sons.’                             
                                                                                    
               [Wi okēˊt hitsonˊoˊtkineˊat]                                         
                                                                                    
          8)   wi oké·t hicónot kinéat                                              
                                                                                    
               wi   oke·t     hicon-ot       ø-kine-at                              
                                                                                    
               my   mother    small.one-DIR  3STATS-be.next-PRET                    
                                                                                    
               ‘My mother was next to youngest.’                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         301                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [ha itēˊt hoktiwē toˊhulat tik noˊmc lāt keˊat]                      
                                                                                    
          9)   ha ité·t hoktiwé·tóhulat tik nómš lá·t kéat                          
                                                                                    
               ha   ité·t hoktiwe·-toh-ul-at      tik  nomš      la·t               
                                                                                    
               her  father be.together-dwell(pl)-3PLS-PRET until children three     
                                                                                    
               ø-ke-at                                                              
                                                                                    
               3STATS-have-PRET                                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘She and her father dwelt together until she had three children.’    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [wi kulcaˊ kaˊ-ukin yaˊ hāˊc yilkeˊ tuˊl ma inoˊ-i tsīˊpcat yaˊ icitsiuˊtsicat]
                                                                                    
          10)  wi kulšá káwkinya ha·š yílke túl maynóy cípšatya išicyúcišat         
                                                                                    
               wi   kulša     ø-kaw-kin=ya        ha-iš     yilke     tul           
                                                                                    
               my   grandfather 3STATS-die-WHEN=and she-FOC marry     lake          
                                                                                    
               maynoy    cipš-ø-at=ya   iš-icyúc-iš-at                              
                                                                                    
               other.side move-3SS-PRET=and 2PLO-grow-CAUS-PRET                     
                                                                                    
               ‘When my grandfather died, then she married and moved to the other side of the
                                                                                    
               lake, and raised us.18’                                              
                                                                                    
               [Yuk’hiˊt itēˊt peˊl (Cyprien) icaˊk toˊkat yukiˊt noˊmc oˊt]        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          11)  yukít ité·tpél <Cyprien> iša·k tólat yukít nómšot                    
                                                                                    
               yukit ité·t-pél <Cyprien> iša·k ø-tol-at     yukit nomš-ot           
                                                                                    
               our  father-far PN       person 3STATS-good-PRET we child-DIR        
                                                                                    
               ‘Our step-father Cyprien was a good man to us children.’             
                                                                                    
               [Icyutyuˊts ya tanuˊkip co haˊ icpaˊts haˊhat]                       
                                                                                    
          12)  išyucyucya tanúkip šoháh išpácháhat                                  
                                                                                    
               iš-,yuc,yuc=ya      tanukip   šo-hah    iš-pac-hah-at                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         302                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               1PLO-,REDUP,raise=and once    ever-NEG  1PLO-whip-NEG-PRET           
                                                                                    
               ‘He raised us and never whipped us even once.’                       
                                                                                    
               [Wīc wi itēˊt iyaniaˊn haˊxcat]                                      
                                                                                    
          13)  wí·š wi ité·t hiyanyánháhšat                                         
                                                                                    
               wi-iš wi  ite·t hi-yanyan-hahš-at                                    
                                                                                    
               I-FOC my  father 1SSTATS-fear-NEG-PRET                               
                                                                                    
               ‘I did not fear my father.’                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Pa-itoˊlucat wiˊ ot]                                                
                                                                                    
          14)  paytólušat wíot                                                      
                                                                                    
               pay-ø-tol-uš-at               wi-ot                                  
                                                                                    
               BACK-3STATS-be.good-be.true-PRET I-DIR                               
                                                                                    
               ‘He was generous to me.’                                             
                                                                                    
               [Iyuˊtskin hac okwaˊñc oˊt tiˊcat yaˊ kaˊwat]                        
                                                                                    
          15)  hiyúckin há·š hokwáŋšot tíšatya káwat                                
                                                                                    
               hi-yuc-kin          ha-iš     hokwaŋš-ot tiš-ø-at=ya                 
                                                                                    
               1SSTAS-be.grown-WHEN he-FOC   war-DIR   go-3SS-PRET=and              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ø-kaw-at                                                             
                                                                                    
               3STATS-die-PRET                                                      
                                                                                    
               ‘When I was grown, he went to the war and died.’                     
                                                                                    
               [Wi okēˊt māñ ilāñ-wāˊñtat]                                          
                                                                                    
          16)  wi oké·t máŋ iláŋwáŋn̥tat                                            
                                                                                    
               wi   oke·t     maŋ       ilaŋ-waŋ-n̥t-at                             
                                                                                    
               my   mother    long.time mourn-go.about-CONTIN-PRET                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         303                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘My mother kept on going about mourning for a long time.’            
                                                                                    
               [Tik’huˊ koˊhat kaˊ-u hāˊxc taˊn, tiˊc aˊ-ucat]                      
                                                                                    
          17)  tikhúkóhat káwháhštán tíš áwšat                                      
                                                                                    
               tik-ø-hu-koh-at          ø-kaw-hahš-tan tiš                          
                                                                                    
               GO.AND-3STATS-see-DESID-PRET 3STATS-die-NEG-ASP go                   
                                                                                    
               ø-awš-at                                                             
                                                                                    
               3STATS-not.be.able-PRET                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘She wanted to go and see him before he died, but she was unable to go.’
                                                                                    
               [Tanuˊkip tiˊcat. Tik’paˊyat]                                        
                                                                                    
          18)  tanúkip tíšat tikpáyat                                               
                                                                                    
               tanuk-ip  tiš-ø-at  tik-pay-ø-at                                     
                                                                                    
               one-INESS go-3SS-PRET GO.AND-return-3SS-PRET                         
                                                                                    
               ‘One time she went; she went and returned.’                          
                                                                                    
               [Kaukauˊ kaˊcik iciˊx aˊ-ucat]                                       
                                                                                    
          19)  kawkáw kášik išíh áwšat                                              
                                                                                    
               kawkaw    kaš-ik         iših ø-awš-at                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               water     high-ERG.INSTR cross 3STATS-not.be.able-PRET               
                                                                                    
               ‘Because of the high water she was not able to cross.’               
                                                                                    
               [Yukiˊt noˊmcsĕm tuhtsĕl yukiˊt nuk]                                 
                                                                                    
          20)  yukít nómšsim tóhcel yukít nuk                                       
                                                                                    
               yukit nomš-šim      toh-cel        yukit nuk                         
                                                                                    
               we   child-NOTHING.BUT stay(pl)-1PLS we self                         
                                                                                    
               ‘It was nothing but us children; we stayed there all by ourselves.’  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         304                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Itiˊ tanuˊkip yiˊl tūt nēn ōˊl paˊi moˊhat]                         
                                                                                    
          21)  ití tanúkip yíl tútnan ó·l paymóhat                                  
                                                                                    
               ití  tanukip   yil  tutnan    o·l  pay-moh-ø-at                      
                                                                                    
               night once     day  before    near BACK-return-3SS-PRET              
                                                                                    
               ‘Once at night, just before daybreak, she returned back.’            
                                                                                    
               [Yukiˊts icatsiˊckicat yukiˊt okēt huˊne]                            
                                                                                    
          22)  yukíts iššaccíškišat yukít hoké·t húne.                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               yukit-š   iš-hat-ciškiš-at         yukit oke·t hu-ne.                
                                                                                    
               we-FOC    1PLSTATS-REFLEX-be:glad-PRET our mother see-GER            
                                                                                    
               ‘We were glad to see our mother.’                                    
                                                                                    
               [Pa-i aˊkc tiˊc koˊhat]                                              
                                                                                    
          23)  payákš tíškóhat                                                      
                                                                                    
               payakš    ø-tiš-koh-at                                               
                                                                                    
               back      3STATS-go-DESID-PRET                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘She wanted to go back.’                                             
                                                                                    
               [Yukīˊts tiˊcne icōˊñcat]                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          24)  yukits tišne išoŋšat                                                 
                                                                                    
               yukit-š   tiš-ne    iš-oŋš-at                                        
                                                                                    
               we-FOC    go(sg)-GER 1PLSTATS-not.want-PRET                          
                                                                                    
               ‘We did not want her to go.’                                         
                                                                                    
               [Kēˊtne naˊmtsel tiˊc hāˊxcne]                                       
                                                                                    
          25)  ke·tne namcel tišhahšne                                              
                                                                                    
               ke·t-ne   nam-cel   tiš-hahš-ne                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         305                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               stay-GER  beg-1PLS  go(sg)-NEG-GER                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘We begged her to stay and not to go.’                               
                                                                                    
          Commentary.                                                               
                                                                                    
          Line 2-3. The movement of Šukuhuy from above Lake Charles to Lake Prien below it mirrors
                                                                                    
          the contraction of the Atakapa population. Yukhíti-speakers formerly had villages near all the
                                                                                    
          lakes along the Calcasieu River, but as their population fell, their villages were reduced to one on
                                                                                    
          either side of Lake Prien, the village of Ló on the west side of the lake, and the village of Túl
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Núŋ on the east side of the lake.                                         
                                                                                    
          Line 6. It is of interest that Tottokš only gives her grandmother’s English name, not her Atakapa
                                                                                    
          one. Among the Koasati upstream from the Atakapa, Indian names were linked to a person’s
                                                                                    
          soul, so they were not used lightly, rather nicknames and English or French names were
                                                                                    
          commonly used.                                                            
                                                                                    
          Line 8. Tottokš never mentions her mother’s name or her father’s or the names of any of her
                                                                                    
          aunts. Although Gatschet remarks in his field notes that there was no ban against naming the
                                                                                    
          dead, there still may have been a taboo against naming one’s deceased parents. She does name
                                                                                    
          her deceased step-father, but he was not a relative by blood. She does not name her siblings, but
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          is seems likely that Rosemond (Teet) Verdine, Swanton’s consultant, and Eliza Verdine were her
                                                                                    
          brother and sister.                                                       
                                                                                    
          Line 10. In this text Tottokš uses the focus forms of pronouns in order to change emphasis from
                                                                                    
          one thread of the narrative to another.                                   
                                                                                    
          Line 13. Here, Tottokš calls Cyprien her father, which suggests that her natural father had died
                                                                                    
          when she was very young.                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         306                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Line 15. The verb root yúc is both transitive and intransitive. Here, in the subordinate mode, it
                                                                                    
          is intransitive: ‘when I grew up.’ Above in line 12, the root, reduplicated to mark a plural object,
                                                                                    
          is transitive: ‘he raised us.’                                            
                                                                                    
           The war that her step-father went to was the Civil War. It is likely that he fought on the
                                                                                    
          Confederate side, like the majority of Louisiana residents. In this sentence because his going and
                                                                                    
          his dying are in sequence the two verbs are joined by the clitic =ya.     
                                                                                    
          Line 16. Here the actions of the mother, mourning and going about, are occurring at the same
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          time. Therefore the two verbs iláŋ and wáŋ are compounded.                
                                                                                    
          Line 17. Gatschet notes that Cyprien was in Alexandria, Louisiana, which was back in
                                                                                    
          Confederate hands in 1864 after a year of Union occupation during the Civil War.
                                                                                    
          Line 20. The deverbal suffix –šim ‘to be nothing but a noun,’ is here attached to the noun nómš
                                                                                    
          ‘child,’ to indicate that after the mother had left, the children were left alone to take care of
                                                                                    
          themselves. Their isolation is further emphasized by the use of the pronoun yukít nuk ‘we
                                                                                    
          ourselves.’                                                               
                                                                                    
          Lines 24-25. Here are examples of gerunds being used as infinitives, as well as the only example
                                                                                    
          of a negative infinitive, tišháhšne ‘not to go.’                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Text 7. Traditional treatment of disease. Found on page 170 of Gatschet’s field notes, this
                                                                                    
          short ethnographic text deals with traditional Atakapa medical practices. He did not give it a
                                                                                    
          title, so Swanton entitled it “Treatment of the Sick.” This entire text suggests that to the Atakapa,
                                                                                    
          illness had a supernatural, not a natural, origin, and was brought about by the malevolence of
                                                                                    
          other people.                                                             
                                                                                    
          šá šoké·š hiwéw káuln̥                                                    
                                                                                    
           tákapa išá·k hatwíwat šáik šoktéy hacehéš míšulat                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         307                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ití tanúk hokinúlulat ha áŋkin                                            
                                                                                    
           šoká·kulat ití máŋ mo·n                                                  
                                                                                    
            šíŋšne šóŋya nákšulat                                                   
                                                                                    
          iláŋšwánkin yókya                                                         
                                                                                    
           yukhíti ipšók hálkin móhat                                               
                                                                                    
            okhúya péniatya yíkšat                                                  
                                                                                    
          tannéw šakhináwškóhšháhulat                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           ikunyúcip ináw šaknáwšulháh                                              
                                                                                    
          iša·k šoké·š káwkin                                                       
                                                                                    
           wíwulat šok hacehéš hiwéw káat                                           
                                                                                    
          When some people became very sick                                         
                                                                                    
           the Atakapa people believed that some people had given them bad medicine.
                                                                                    
          One night they met each other at his/her house.                           
                                                                                    
          They did ceremonial dancing all night long.                               
                                                                                    
           They rattled gourd rattles and played musical instruments.               
                                                                                    
          As they went around grieving, they sang,                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           and afterwards the Indian doctor was going about and arriving.           
                                                                                    
            He came to see him/her and cured him/her, and he/she paid him           
                                                                                    
          They did not want other people to enter,                                  
                                                                                    
           They did not allow for young people to enter.                            
                                                                                    
          After someone sick died,                                                  
                                                                                    
           they believed that something very bad had done it.                       
                                                                                    
               [Caˊ cok’hĕc hiweˊ-u kaˊ-ulĕn]                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         308                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          1)   šá šoké·š hiwéw káuln̥                                               
                                                                                    
               ša        šoke·š    hiwew     ka-ul-n̥                               
                                                                                    
               someone   be.sick   be.strong do-3PLS-IF                             
                                                                                    
               ‘When people became very sick…                                       
                                                                                    
               [Taˊkapo icāˊk hatwiˊvat, caˊ-ik cukteˊ-i hatse-eˊc miˊculat]        
                                                                                    
          2)   tákapa išá·k hatwíwat šáik šoktéy hacehéš míšulat                    
                                                                                    
               takapa    iša·k     hat-wiw-at     ša-ik               šoktey        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Atakapa   people    REFLEX-believe-PRET someone-ERG.AGNT             
                                                                                    
               medicine                                                             
                                                                                    
               haceheš   ø-miš-ul-at                                                
                                                                                    
               bad(sg)   3OBJ-give-3PLS-PRET                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘the Atakapa people believed that some people had given them bad medicine.’
                                                                                    
               [Itiˊ tanuˊk okinuˊlulat haˊ aˊñkin]                                 
                                                                                    
          3)   ití tanúk hokinúlulat ha áŋkin                                       
                                                                                    
               ití  tanuk hok-inul-ul-at     ha   aŋ-kin                            
                                                                                    
               night one RECIP-met-3PLS-PRET his house-LOC                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘One night they met each other at his/her house.’                    
                                                                                    
               [cukaˊulat itiˊ maˊñ mōn]                                            
                                                                                    
          4)   šoká·kulat ití máŋ mo·n                                              
                                                                                    
               šoka·k-ul-at        ití  maŋ  mo·n                                   
                                                                                    
               ceremonial.dance-3PLS-PRET night long all                            
                                                                                    
               ‘They did ceremonial dancing all night long.’                        
                                                                                    
               [ciˊñcne cōˊñxia yaˊ naˊxkculat]                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         309                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          5)   šíŋšne šóŋya nákšulat                                                
                                                                                    
               šiŋšne    šoŋ=ya    nakš-ul-at                                       
                                                                                    
               gourd.rattle rattle=and play.instrument-3PLS-PRET                    
                                                                                    
               ‘They rattled gourd rattles and played musical instruments.’         
                                                                                    
               [Iˊñc-waˊnkin yoˊk yaˊ Yuk’hiˊti ipcōˊk haˊl(kin) moˊk waˊnkit]      
                                                                                    
          6)   iláŋšwáŋkin yókya yukhíti ipšók hálkin mókwáŋhki                     
                                                                                    
               ilaŋš-waŋ-kin       yok=ya    yukhiti   ipšok     halkin             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               grieve-go.about-WHEN sing=and Indian    doctor    afterwards         
                                                                                    
               mok-waŋ-kit                                                          
                                                                                    
               arrive(sg)-go.about-PRET-PROG(SG)                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘As they went around grieving, they sang, and afterwards the Indian doctor
                                                                                    
               was going about and arriving.’                                       
                                                                                    
               [ok hūˊya peˊneat yaˊ yīˊkcat]                                       
                                                                                    
          7)   okhúya péniatya yíkšat                                               
                                                                                    
               ok-hu=ya            peni-at=ya     yikš-at                           
                                                                                    
               COME.AND-see=and    cure-PRET=and  pay-PRET                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘He came to see him/her and cured him/her, and he/she paid him.’     
                                                                                    
               [Taneˊ-u cakinaˊ-uc koˊxcaˊhulat]                                    
                                                                                    
          8)   tannéw šakináwškóhšháhulat                                           
                                                                                    
               tan-hew        šak-inawš-kohš-hah-ul-at                              
                                                                                    
               other-PL       3PLO-enter-DESID-NEG-3PLS-PRET                        
                                                                                    
               ‘They did not want other people to enter.’                           
                                                                                    
               [Ikunyuˊtsip inaˊ-u caknaˊ-ucul haˊ]                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         310                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          9)   ikunyúcip ináwš šaknáwšulháh                                         
                                                                                    
               ikunyuc-ip inawš šak-nawš-ul-hah                                     
                                                                                    
               youth-INESS enter 3PLO-allow-3PLS-NEG                                
                                                                                    
               ‘They do/did not allow for young people to enter’                    
                                                                                    
               [Icāk cuk’hēˊc kaˊ-ukin vīˊwulat cok hatse-eˊc hiweˊ-u kaˊ-at]       
                                                                                    
          10)  iša·k šoké·š káwkin wíwulat šok hacehéš hiwéw káat                   
                                                                                    
               iša·k šoke·š kaw-kin wiw-u-lat     šok  haceheš hiwew                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               person sick die-WHEN believe-3PLS-PRET thing bad very                
                                                                                    
               ka-at                                                                
                                                                                    
               do-PRET                                                              
                                                                                    
               ‘After someone sick died, they believed that something very bad had done it.’
                                                                                    
          Commentary.                                                               
                                                                                    
          Line 1. The verb ‘to be sick’ is written in this text [cok’hēˊc] and [cuk’hēˊc], but recordings of
                                                                                    
          this word elsewhere indicate that the form is actually šoké·š without the /kh/ consonant cluster.
                                                                                    
          As Atakapa stops seem to have been fortis and aspirated, it seems that Gatschet was
                                                                                    
          overdifferentiating, and recording the non-phonemic feature of aspiration.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           The translation of this line is a bit misleading. Literally translated it says, “When strong
                                                                                    
          illnesses did people…” This reflects the idea as expressed further on in this text that illness was
                                                                                    
          the result of sorcery, not natural causes.”                               
                                                                                    
          Line 2. The mention of an indefinite “someone” may refer to the people described in the
                                                                                    
          vocabulary as ‘witch’ and ‘sorceror:’ kíš yón and išá·k yón.              
                                                                                    
           In this sentence, the complement clause of the verb hatwíwat ‘believed’ is an independent
                                                                                    
          sentence.                                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         311                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Line 4. The phrase ití máŋ mo·n ‘all night long,’ literally ‘night long all,’ although it seems to be
                                                                                    
          a calque on English, is rather an independent, parallel development, as the last speakers of
                                                                                    
          Atakapa were more conversant in French than in English, and the French idiom, tout la nuit is
                                                                                    
          rather different in structure.                                            
                                                                                    
          Line 5. In the form of this line in the field notes and publication, the clitic =ya, already affixed
                                                                                    
          to the verb šóŋ ‘to rattle,’ is repeated by Gatschet as an independent word because he had
                                                                                    
          internalized the idea that since the clitic meant ‘and,’ it was an independent word, as in English
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          or German.                                                                
                                                                                    
          Line 6. Swanton interpreted the otherwise meaningless string [Iˊñc], which is what appears in
                                                                                    
          the field notes, as the verb iláŋš ‘mourn’ based on Gatschet’s interlinear gloss.
                                                                                    
           In the original field notes, the phrase {mók wankit} has noted beneath it {or (móhat)}. This
                                                                                    
          latter has been lined out and further below is written {or móhat without wánkit}. This latter note
                                                                                    
          was included in the publication; móhat means ‘he arrived.’                
                                                                                    
           Further information about the practices of the traditional Atakapa doctor is given in lines 12-13
                                                                                    
          of Text 4, above, the most important being that the traditional doctor sucked out the illness. This
                                                                                    
          is also reflected in the phrase recorded in the corpus: šoktéy hacehéš hólš ‘to bewitch someone,’
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          literally, ‘to put bad medicine into someone.’                            
                                                                                    
          Line 7. Usually verbs joined with the enclitic =ya have any aspectual suffixes attached to the
                                                                                    
          final verb of the sentence. Here, instead, okhúya péniatya yíkšat shows =ya occurring after the
                                                                                    
          preterite suffix -at. This is due to the fact that the verbs péni ‘cure’ and yíkš ‘pay’ have different
                                                                                    
          subjects.                                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         312                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Line 8. The verb in this sentence gives an example of the negative desiderative. There seems to
                                                                                    
          be a subtle semantic difference between the negative desiderative and the independent verb óŋš
                                                                                    
          ‘not to want.’                                                            
                                                                                    
            Traditional doctors in the Southeast did not like to have people observe them as they did their
                                                                                    
          curing. This attitude is parodied in the Koasati tale ‘Vulture “Cures” Rabbit’ (Kimball 2010:42-
                                                                                    
          46).                                                                      
                                                                                    
          Line 9. The inessive case is used on the noun in this sentence to mark it as peripheral, thus
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          avoiding a relative clause equivalent. This line is in the aorist mode, rather than the preterite, but
                                                                                    
          it can still be understood as referring to past time.                     
                                                                                    
          Text 8. Traditional burial practices. This is a further ethnographic text about burial customs.
                                                                                    
          It is found on pages 171-173 of Gatschet’s field notes. He entitled it “Himōˊc; Burial.” The text
                                                                                    
          falls into six sections, in which the third, fourth, and fifth sections can be understood as sub-
                                                                                    
          sections of the second section.                                           
                                                                                    
          I. Preparations for Burial                                                
                                                                                    
          tákapa kícn̥ išá·k káwkin                                                 
                                                                                    
           í·t uckáwšulat okyúlikya okká óci                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          wíwulat iša·k šappíhk tannéw okšakhúulat                                  
                                                                                    
           áŋkin tíhkin okhúulat                                                    
                                                                                    
          káy aŋkát páyš náwulat ha áŋkin                                           
                                                                                    
           káw atkáki tík himó·štin né·támkinya                                     
                                                                                    
            hál yílkin himó·šulat                                                   
                                                                                    
            šoká·kháŋštin himó·šulat                                                
                                                                                    
          yukhíti mó·ni hokinúlulat himó·šot tíwne                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         313                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           káw ókkin tókšya himó·šulat                                              
                                                                                    
          When an Atakapa woman or man died,                                        
                                                                                    
           they covered the face with a handkerchief and put a cloth on top.        
                                                                                    
          They believed that other dead people came to see them;                    
                                                                                    
           they came to see him/her while he/she was lying in the house.            
                                                                                    
          And then they left the door open in his/her house                         
                                                                                    
           from the time of his death until they went to bury him/her in a grave,   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            and on the next day, they buried him/her;                               
                                                                                    
            when they had finished the ceremonial dance, they buried him/her.       
                                                                                    
          All the Indians gathered together to go to the burial.                    
                                                                                    
           They wrapped the dead person in cloth and buried him/her.                
                                                                                    
          II. Burial Goods.                                                         
                                                                                    
           ha cokmó·n hoktiwé·himó·šulat                                            
                                                                                    
            hatakinén                                                               
                                                                                    
              cikƛúkšne.                                                            
                                                                                    
               wošké                                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                ánhatkómš                                                           
                                                                                    
           kucnán túik ká                                                           
                                                                                    
            škóp                                                                    
                                                                                    
              náw                                                                   
                                                                                    
               šokhatké mo·n                                                        
                                                                                    
                 laklákš.                                                           
                                                                                    
          They buried his/her possessions with him/her:                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         314                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            Beads,                                                                  
                                                                                    
              pipe,                                                                 
                                                                                    
               rings,                                                               
                                                                                    
               earrings,                                                            
                                                                                    
             knife made of cane,                                                    
                                                                                    
              cups,                                                                 
                                                                                    
               moccasins,                                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                all clothing,                                                       
                                                                                    
                and money.                                                          
                                                                                    
          III. Burial Goods for a Warrior                                           
                                                                                    
          išá·k hokwáŋš wáŋn̥                                                       
                                                                                    
           ha šokhokinácne mo·n hoktiwé·himó·šulat                                  
                                                                                    
          té                                                                        
                                                                                    
           tík                                                                      
                                                                                    
            yapúhne                                                                 
                                                                                    
              kucne                                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          tikšakkáwne                                                               
                                                                                    
           pém                                                                      
                                                                                    
            hatpáˑšne                                                               
                                                                                    
          If a person went to war,                                                  
                                                                                    
           they buried all his weapons together with him:                           
                                                                                    
            bow,                                                                    
                                                                                    
              arrows,                                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         315                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               spears,                                                              
                                                                                    
               and knife,                                                           
                                                                                    
           quiver,                                                                  
                                                                                    
            gun,                                                                    
                                                                                    
            and armour.                                                             
                                                                                    
          IV. Burial Goods for a Chief                                              
                                                                                    
          yá iša·k káw yukhíti šokóyn̥                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           ha canúk                                                                 
                                                                                    
            nešipáhš                                                                
                                                                                    
              iša·thatyínsne laklákškópik ká hoktiwé·himó·šulat                     
                                                                                    
          If that dead person were an Indian chief,                                 
                                                                                    
           they buried him together with his horse,                                 
                                                                                    
            saddle,                                                                 
                                                                                    
            and crown made of silver.                                               
                                                                                    
          V. The Finding of a Buried Crown                                          
                                                                                    
          iša·thatyínsne laklákškópik ká winéulat                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           yukhíti túl hikí inó                                                     
                                                                                    
            né· húy                                                                 
                                                                                    
            iwálkin                                                                 
                                                                                    
             núl támtin                                                             
                                                                                    
             neškiŋštamšáŋ núl kátin                                                
                                                                                    
               payákš himó·šulat                                                    
                                                                                    
          čákta yukhíti iša·thatyínsne hináka šakkéat                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         316                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          They found a crown made of silver                                         
                                                                                    
           on the west side of Lake Prien,                                          
                                                                                    
            under the ground                                                        
                                                                                    
            in the shells,                                                          
                                                                                    
              when they were digging a foundation,                                  
                                                                                    
              when they were making the sawmill’s foundation,                       
                                                                                    
               and they buried it again.                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          The Choctaw Indians had crowns in the same way.                           
                                                                                    
          VI. Rites after Burial                                                    
                                                                                    
          iša·k káw áŋ láwiulat                                                     
                                                                                    
           ha šakišá·k cípšulat hiwéwš tanúk máy                                    
                                                                                    
          himó·šmak máŋ kaya                                                        
                                                                                    
           hó·p náwulat šó hitáhne                                                  
                                                                                    
          icà·k šappíhk šakláwiulháhat                                              
                                                                                    
          They burned the dead person’s house.                                      
                                                                                    
           His relatives moved a mile away.                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            They made a long grave-mound,                                           
                                                                                    
            and left a hole for the soul to come out.                               
                                                                                    
          They did not burn the dead.                                               
                                                                                    
               [Taˊkapa kic n icāˊk kaˊ-ukin īt utskaˊ-uculat okyuˊlik yaˊ okaˊ oˊtsi]
                                                                                    
          1)   tákapa kíšn̥ išá·k káwkin í·t uckáwšulat okyúlikya okká óci          
                                                                                    
               takapa    kiš=n̥    iša·k ø-kaw-kin     i·t  uckawš-ul-at            
                                                                                    
               Atakapa   woman=and man  3STATS-die(sg)-WHEN face cover-3PLS-PRET    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         317                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               okyul-ik=ya              okka oci                                    
                                                                                    
               handkerchief-ERG.INSTR=and cloth on.top                              
                                                                                    
               ‘When an Atakapa woman or man died, they covered the face with a     
                                                                                    
               handkerchief and put a cloth on top.’                                
                                                                                    
               [Viˊvulat iˊcak capiˊx̥ k taneˊ-u okcak’huˊ-ulat. Aˊnkin tiˊx̥ kin ok-huˊ-ulat]
                                                                                    
          2)   wíwulat iša·k šappíhk tannéw okšakhúulat áŋkin tíhkin okhúulat       
                                                                                    
               wiw-ul-at      iša·k     šak-pihk  tan-hew                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               believe-3PLS-PRET person PL-die(pl) other-PL                         
                                                                                    
               ok-šak-hu-ul-at          aŋ-kin    ø-tiht-kin                        
                                                                                    
               COME.AND-3PLO-see-3PLS-PRET house-LOC 3STATS-lie-WHEN                
                                                                                    
               ok-hu-ul-at                                                          
                                                                                    
               COME.AND-See-3PLS-PRET                                               
                                                                                    
               ‘They believed that other dead people came to see them; they came to see
                                                                                    
               him/her while he/she was lying in the house.’                        
                                                                                    
               [Kaˊ-i aˊn kaˊt-paˊ-ic naˊ-ulat haˊ aˊnkin kaˊ-u atkaˊki tiˊk imōˊctin Neˊ taˊmkin yaˊ]
                                                                                    
          3)   káy aŋkát páyš náwulat ha áŋkin káw atkáki tik himó·štin né·támkinya 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               kay       aŋkat payš naw-ul-at     ha   aŋ-kin                       
                                                                                    
               and.then  door open leave-3PL-PRET his  house-LOC                    
                                                                                    
               ø-kaw          atkaki    tik  himo·š-ti-n    ne·tam-kin=ya           
                                                                                    
               3STATS-die(sg) since     until bury-PSTPROG-WHEN grave-LOC=and       
                                                                                    
               ‘And then they left the door open in his/her house from the time of his death
                                                                                    
               until they went to bury him/her in a grave, and….’                   
                                                                                    
               [haˊl yiˊlkin imōˊculat]                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         318                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          4)   hál yílkin himó·šulat                                                
                                                                                    
               hal  yil-kin   himo·š-ul-at                                          
                                                                                    
               next day-LOC   bury-3PLS-PRET                                        
                                                                                    
               ‘On the next day, they buried him/her.’                              
                                                                                    
               [cukaˊhāˊñctin imōˊculat]                                            
                                                                                    
          5)   šoká·kháŋštin himó·šulat                                             
                                                                                    
               šoka·k-haŋš-ti-n                   himo·š-ul-at                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ceremonial.dance-finish-pst.prog-WHEN bury-3PLS-PRET                 
                                                                                    
               ‘When they had finished the ceremonial dance, they buried him/her’   
                                                                                    
               [Yukiˊti mōˊne oˊk-inuˊlulat imōˊc oˊt tiˊune]                       
                                                                                    
          6)   yukhíti mó·ni hokinúlulat himó·šot tíwne                             
                                                                                    
               yukhiti   mo·ni     hok-inul-ul-at      himo·š-ot tiw-ne             
                                                                                    
               Indian    all(human) RECIP-meet-3PLS-PRET burial-DIR go(pl)-GER      
                                                                                    
               ‘All the Indians met each other to go to the burial.’                
                                                                                    
               [Kaˊ-u oˊkin toˊkc ya imōˊculat]                                     
                                                                                    
          7)   káw ókkin tókšya himó·šulat                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               kaw       ok-kin    tokš=ya        himo·š-ul-at                      
                                                                                    
               dead.person cloth-LOC wrap=and     bury-3PLS-PRET                    
                                                                                    
               ‘They wrapped the dead person in cloth and buried him/her.’          
                                                                                    
               [ha cokmoˊn oktewē imoˊculat]                                        
                                                                                    
          8)   ha šokmó·n hoktiwé·himó·šulat                                        
                                                                                    
               ha   šok-mo·n  hoktiwe·-himo·šulat                                   
                                                                                    
               his  thing-all be.together-bury-3PLS-PRET                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         319                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘They buried his/her possessions with him/her:’                      
                                                                                    
               [hataˊkinēn tsik-tlukcnē woˊc keˊ aˊnhatkoˊmc kutsnăˊn tuˊik kaˊ]    
                                                                                    
          9)   hatákinan cikƛúkšne wošké ánhatkómš kucnán túik ká                   
                                                                                    
               hatakinan cikƛukšne woške anhatkómš kucnan   tu-ik                   
                                                                                    
               beads     pipe      ring earring   knife     cane-ERG.INSTR          
                                                                                    
               ka                                                                   
                                                                                    
               made                                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘Beads, pipe, rings, earrings, knife made of cane,’                  
                                                                                    
               [ckoˊp naˊ-u cox̥ -hatkaˊx̥ k mōn laklaˊkc]                          
                                                                                    
          10)  škóp náw šokhatké mo·n laklákš                                       
                                                                                    
               škop naw       šokhatke  mo·n laklakš                                
                                                                                    
               cups moccasins clothing  all  money                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘cups, moccasins, all clothing, and money.’                          
                                                                                    
               [Icāˊk hokwaˊñc wāˊñĕn]                                              
                                                                                    
          11)  išá·k hokwáŋš wáŋn̥                                                  
                                                                                    
               iša·k     hokwaŋš   ø-waŋ-n̥                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               person    war       3STATS-go.about-IF                               
                                                                                    
               ‘If a person had gone to war,’                                       
                                                                                    
               [haˊ cok’-okināˊtsne mōn hoktiwēˊ imōˊculat]                         
                                                                                    
          12)  ha šokhokinácne mo·n hoktiwé·himó·šulat                              
                                                                                    
               ha   šok-hok-inac-ne     mo·n hoktiwe·-himo·š-ul-at                  
                                                                                    
               his  STH-RECIP-fight-GER all  be.together-bury-3PLS-PRET             
                                                                                    
               ‘they buried all his weapons together with him.’                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         320                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [teˊ tiˊk yapuˊxne kutsneˊ]                                          
                                                                                    
          13)  té tík yapúhne kucné                                                 
                                                                                    
               te        tik       yapuhne   kucne                                  
                                                                                    
               bow       arrows    spears    knife                                  
                                                                                    
               ‘bow, arrows, spears, and knife,’                                    
                                                                                    
               [tik-cak’xaˊ-une pēm aˊtpantsnē]                                     
                                                                                    
          14)  tikšakkáwne pém hatpàˑšne                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               tik-šak-kaw-ne      pem  hat-pa·c-ne                                 
                                                                                    
               arrow-3PLO-put.in-GER gun REFLEX-cover-GER                           
                                                                                    
               ‘quiver, gun, and armour.’                                           
                                                                                    
               [Yaˊ icaˊk kaˊ-u yuk’hiˊti cox̥ koˊ-in haˊ tsanuˊk nec ipaˊx̥ c icā́t atyĕˊnē
                                                                                    
          15)  yá iša·k káw yukhíti šokóyn̥ ha canúk nešipáhš iša·thatyínšne        
                                                                                    
               laklaˊkc k’opik kaˊ hoktiwēˊ imōˊculat]                              
                                                                                    
               laklákškopik ká hoktiwé·himó·šulat                                   
                                                                                    
               ya   iša·k     kaw  yukhiti   ø-šokoy-n̥     ha   canuk              
                                                                                    
               nešipahš                                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               that person    dead Indian    3STATS-be.chief-IF his horse saddle    
                                                                                    
               iša·t-hat-yinš-ne   laklakš-kop-ik           ka                      
                                                                                    
               head-REFLEX-wrap-GER precious.metal-white-ERG.INSTR make             
                                                                                    
               hok-tiwe·-himo·š-ul-at                                               
                                                                                    
               RECIP-be.together-bury-3PLS-PRET                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘If that dead person were an Indian chief, they buried him together with his horse,
                                                                                    
               saddle, and crown made of silver.’                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         321                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Icāˊt atyĕˊnē laklaˊkc koˊpik kaˊ wine-ulat Yuk’hiˊti Tuˊl hikiˊ inoˊ nē huˊ-i
                                                                                    
          16)  iša·thatyíncne laklákškópik ká winéulat yukhíti túl hikí inó né· húy 
                                                                                    
               iwaˊlkin nuˊl taˊmtin nec-kīñc taˊmc anˊ nuˊl kaˊtin payāˊkc imōˊculat]
                                                                                    
               iwálkin núl támtin neškiŋštámšaŋ núl kátin payákš himó·šulat         
                                                                                    
               iša·thatyincne laklakškop-ik  ka   wine-ul-at     yukhiti            
                                                                                    
               crown          silver-ERG.INSTR make find-3PLS-PRET Indian           
                                                                                    
               tul  hiki ino  ne·       huy       iwal-kin  nul                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               lake west side ground    under     shells-LOC foundation             
                                                                                    
               tam-ti-n       neškiŋštamšaŋ  nul       ka-ti-n                      
                                                                                    
               dig-PST.PROG-WHEN sawmill     foundation make-PST.PROG-WHEN          
                                                                                    
               payakš    himo·š-ul-at                                               
                                                                                    
               again     bury-3PLS-PRET                                             
                                                                                    
               ‘They found a crown made of silver on the west side of Lake Prien (Indian Lake),
                                                                                    
               under the ground in the shells, when they were digging a foundation, when they
                                                                                    
               were making the sawmill’s foundation, and they buried it again.’     
                                                                                    
               [Tchaˊkta yuk’hiti icāˊt atyiˊnsne hinaˊka cakeˊat]                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          17)  čákta yukhíti iša·thatyíncne hinákka šakkéat                         
                                                                                    
               čakta     yukhiti   iša·t-hat-yinc-ne        hinakka                 
                                                                                    
               Choctaw   Indian    head-REFLEX-wrap.around-GER like                 
                                                                                    
               šak-ke-at                                                            
                                                                                    
               3PLSTATS-have-PRET                                                   
                                                                                    
               ‘The Choctaw Indians had crowns in the same way.’                    
                                                                                    
               [Iˊcak kaˊw aˊñ laˊwiulat]                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         322                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          18)  išà·k káw áŋ láwiulat                                                
                                                                                    
               iša·k     kaw  aŋ   law-i-ul-at.                                     
                                                                                    
               person    dead house burn-CAUS-3PLS-PRET                             
                                                                                    
               ‘They burned the dead person’s house.                                
                                                                                    
               [ha cakicāˊk tsīˊpsulat hiweˊvc tanuˊk maˊ-i]                        
                                                                                    
          19)  ha šakišá·k cípšulat hiwéwš tanúk máy                                
                                                                                    
               ha   šak-iša·k cipš-ul-at     hiwewš    tanuk may                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               his  PL-person move-3PLS-PRET measure   one  away                    
                                                                                    
               ‘His relatives moved a mile away.’                                   
                                                                                    
               [Imōˊc mak māˊñ kaˊ ya hoˊxp naˊ-ulat coˊ itaˊxne]                   
                                                                                    
          20)  himo·šmak máŋ káya hóp náwulat šó hitáhne                            
                                                                                    
               himo·š-mak maŋ ka=ya     hop  naw-ul-at      šo                      
                                                                                    
               grave-mound long make=and hole leave-3PLS-PRET soul                  
                                                                                    
               hitah-ne                                                             
                                                                                    
               come-out-GER                                                         
                                                                                    
               ‘They made a long grave-mound, and left a hole for the soul to come out.’
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Iˊcak capiˊxk caklaˊwiuláat]                                        
                                                                                    
          21)  išà·k šappíhk šakláwiulháhat                                         
                                                                                    
               iša·k     šak-pihk-ø     šak-lawi-ul-hah-at                          
                                                                                    
               person    PL-die(pl)-ABS 3PLOBJ-BURN-3PLS-NEG-PRET                   
                                                                                    
               ‘They did not burn the dead.’                                        
                                                                                    
          Commentary.                                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         323                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Line 1. When dictating the text, Tottokš first said okkáik ‘with a cloth, and then changed it to
                                                                                    
          okyúlik ‘with a handkerchief.’ The presence of the clitic =ya¸which joins sentences, suggests that
                                                                                    
          the final words of the sentence okká óci ‘a cloth on top’ are understood to be followed by a verb
                                                                                    
          such as uckáwš.                                                           
                                                                                    
          Line 4. This statement that the Atakapa buried a corpse the day after death indicates that the
                                                                                    
          story of Palnal in Text 1, who was beaten by his wives and died, does not describe him as lying
                                                                                    
          dead on the ground three or four days, but rather as surviving that length of time before dying.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Line 6. Tottokš originally began the sentence with mó·ni ‘everyone,’ but on further review with
                                                                                    
          Gatschet changed it to yukhíti mó·ni, ‘all the Indians.’                  
                                                                                    
           Here the gerund tíwne ‘to go (pl)’ is used to express purpose: ‘in order to go.’
                                                                                    
          Line 9. In his field notes, after the word kucnán ‘knife,’ Gatschet wrote parenthetically (Had
                                                                                    
          they any?), presumably thinking that traditional Atakapa technology was without metal. When
                                                                                    
          Tottokš went over the text again with him, she added the words túik ká ‘made of cane,’ to satisfy
                                                                                    
          his concern.                                                              
                                                                                    
          Line 10. For no clear reason, Gatschet altered the words Tottokš said here from hakít škóp ‘their
                                                                                    
          cups’ simply to škóp ‘cups.’                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Line 15. Gatschet mis-heard the word for ‘crown,’ writing {ishāt atyĕne} for išá·t hatyíncne.
                                                                                    
          When Tottokš repeated the word again in the next line, Gatschet abbreviated it as {ishāt
                                                                                    
          aty.lik.ka}, rather than writing out iša·thatyíncne laklákškópik ká ‘a crown made of silver.’ In
                                                                                    
          line 17, when she repeated the word again, Gatschet transcribed it more accurately as {ishāt
                                                                                    
          atyínsne]. When Swanton edited the text for publication, however, he used the erroneous first
                                                                                    
          transcription rather than the second one.                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         324                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           Before becoming integrated into the money economy, the Atakapa, Choctaw, and Koasati in
                                                                                    
          Louisiana used to take any silver coins they received and hammer them into jewelry. The
                                                                                    
          National Museum of the American Indian has an example of a silver crown such as is described
                                                                                    
          in the text that was collected from the Choctaw in 1908 (NMAI 1/9081), and another that was
                                                                                    
          collected from the Koasati in the same year (NMAI 1/8623).                
                                                                                    
          Line 16. This sentence is an elaborate piece of verbal art, and gives a hint of what Atakapa oral
                                                                                    
          literature must have been like. It is composed of interlocking phrases, with the first and last
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          phrases framing the rest; the locative phrases are paired, with the second divided in two, and
                                                                                    
          further actions also arranged in a pair. A visual arrangement of the translation is as follows:
                                                                                    
           They found a crown made of silver                                        
                                                                                    
            on the west side of Lake Prien,                                         
                                                                                    
              under the ground                                                      
                                                                                    
              in the shells                                                         
                                                                                    
               when they were digging a foundation,                                 
                                                                                    
               when they were making the sawmill’s foundation,                      
                                                                                    
           and they buried it again.                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          It is interesting that the men who found the crown reburied it, rather than keeping it as a
                                                                                    
          curiousity or for melting down and selling. Presumably an Indian on the work gang told the rest
                                                                                    
          that it was part of a burial, and the men felt that reburial was appropriate.
                                                                                    
          Text 9. A fight among Black people in Lake Charles. This short text, found on pages 174-
                                                                                    
          175 of Gatschet’s field notes, is an anecdote about a fight among Black people in Lake Charles.
                                                                                    
          Gatschet himself gave it a title that we would find shocking nowadays; Swanton very wisely
                                                                                    
          toned it down for publication and entitled it “A Fight Among Negroes at Lake Charles.” The
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         325                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          story is told with a dry sense of humor, as the action as described is quite over the top, using two
                                                                                    
          examples of reduplication with infixation to heighten the drama, yet despite everything no one
                                                                                    
          seems to have been injured or killed. This text contains the only example of quoted speech in the
                                                                                    
          corpus, so it is linguistically quite interesting.                        
                                                                                    
          samtí ití kúšmelmé·l púm káulat                                           
                                                                                    
          wáŋpúmya                                                                  
                                                                                    
           kíš tanúk tánot iká·t pákat                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ya kíš tánik wáncat,                                                      
                                                                                    
           “wi iká·t n̥pákat,”                                                      
                                                                                    
            “hihaccíškišháh,” wánat                                                 
                                                                                    
              hikáwškin kát óc pákat                                                
                                                                                    
          ya šakyól hakítiš hokináculat                                             
                                                                                    
           kicá·k šappíhkya pámhokpámišulatya hokpé·mulat                           
                                                                                    
            tannéw túlkin pákšakpákišat                                             
                                                                                    
              tannéw kawkáwkin púmhikhólšulat                                       
                                                                                    
          wáŋhokpé·mkin iša·kšakkoŋne okšakyálat                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           iša·k ní·t áŋlá·kkin šakináwšulat                                        
                                                                                    
            kéš lá·t šakináwšulat                                                   
                                                                                    
              yilhiwéw pétik yíl šakhitáwšulat                                      
                                                                                    
                tanúk eykún tan áŋlá·kkin tíht                                      
                                                                                    
          On Saturday night, the black people held a dance.                         
                                                                                    
          They were going about dancing,                                            
                                                                                    
           and one woman stepped on the foot of another.                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         326                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          The other woman said to her,                                              
                                                                                    
           “You stepped on my foot.                                                 
                                                                                    
             I am not pleased,” she said.                                           
                                                                                    
              When she finished, she hit her on the mouth.                          
                                                                                    
          As for those men, they fought.                                            
                                                                                    
           They were drunk, and they really beat each other up.                     
                                                                                    
            They threw some of them again and again into the lake.                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
              Others went and jumped into the water.                                
                                                                                    
          When they were going about shooting at each other, the sheriff came and arrested them.
                                                                                    
           They put five men in jail.                                               
                                                                                    
            They put three women in.                                                
                                                                                    
              On Monday, they let them out.                                         
                                                                                    
               One is still now in jail.                                            
                                                                                    
               [Samtiˊ hitiˊ kuˊcmelmēl puˊm kaˊ-ulat]                              
                                                                                    
          1)   samtí ití kúšmélme·l púm káulat                                      
                                                                                    
               samti     ití  kuš,mel,me·l   pum  ka-ul-at                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Saturday  night black.person,PL, dance make-3PLS-PRET                
                                                                                    
               ‘On Saturday night, the black people held a dance.’                  
                                                                                    
               [Wāˊñ-pum yaˊ kic tanuˊk taˊxn ut ikāt paˊkĕt]                       
                                                                                    
          2)   wáŋpúmya kíš tanúk tánot iká·t pákat                                 
                                                                                    
               waŋ-pum=ya     kiš       tanuk tan-ot   hika·t pak-ø-at              
                                                                                    
               go.about-dance=and woman one  another-DIR foot step.on-3SS-PRET      
                                                                                    
               ‘They were going about dancing, and one woman stepped on the foot of another.’
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         327                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [ya kiˊc taˊxnik waˊntsăt]                                           
                                                                                    
          3)   ya kíš tánik wáncat                                                  
                                                                                    
               ya   kiš       tan-ik         wanc-ø-at                              
                                                                                    
               that woman     other-ERG.AGNT say.to-3SS-PRET                        
                                                                                    
               ‘The other woman said to her,’                                       
                                                                                    
               [wi ikāt ‘npaˊkat]                                                   
                                                                                    
          4)   wi hiká·t n̥pákat                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               wi   hika·t n̥-pak-at                                                
                                                                                    
               my   foot 2SSTATS-step.on-PRET                                       
                                                                                    
               ‘You stepped on my foot.’                                            
                                                                                    
               [Atsiˊc-kic haˊ waˊnat]                                              
                                                                                    
          5)   “hihaccíškišháh,” wánat                                              
                                                                                    
               hi-hat-ciškiš-hah        wan-ø-at                                    
                                                                                    
               1SSTATS-REFLEX-be.pleased-NEG say-3SS-PRET                           
                                                                                    
               ‘“I am not pleased,” she said.’                                      
                                                                                    
               [Hikaˊ-uckin kaˊt oˊts paˊkĕt]                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          6)   hikáwškin kát óc pákat                                               
                                                                                    
               ø-hikawš-kin   kat       oc   pak-ø-at                               
                                                                                    
               3STATS-finish-WHEN mouth on   hit-3SS-PRET                           
                                                                                    
               ‘When she finished, she hit her on the mouth.’                       
                                                                                    
               [Ya cukiōˊl hak’hiˊtic ok-inaˊtsûlat]                                
                                                                                    
          7)   ya šakyól hakítiš hokináculat                                        
                                                                                    
               ya   šakyol    hakit-iš  hok-inac-ul-at                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         328                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               that man       they-FOC  RECIP-fight-3PL-PRET                        
                                                                                    
               ‘As for those men, they fought each other.’                          
                                                                                    
               [Kitsāˊk cakpiˊx̥ k yaˊ paˊm (h)okpaˊmiculat]                        
                                                                                    
          8)   kicá·k šakpíhkya pámhokpámišulat                                     
                                                                                    
               kica·k    šak-pihk=ya         pam,hok,pam-iš-ul-at                   
                                                                                    
               whiskey   3PLSTATS-be.dead(pl)=and REDUP,RECIP,beat-CAUS-3PLS-PRET   
                                                                                    
               ‘They were drunk, and they really beat each other up.’               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [Taneˊ-u tuˊlkin paˊk-cakpaˊkicat]                                   
                                                                                    
          9)   tannéw túlkin pákšakpákišat                                          
                                                                                    
               tan-hew   tul-kin   pak,šak,pakiš-ø-at                               
                                                                                    
               some-PL   lake-LOC  REDUP,3PLOBJ,throw.in.- 3SS-PRET                 
                                                                                    
               ‘They threw some of them again and again into the lake.              
                                                                                    
               [Taneˊ-u kaukauˊkin puˊm-hik’huˊlculat]                              
                                                                                    
          10)  tannéw kawkáwkin púmhikihólšulat                                     
                                                                                    
               tan-hew   kawkaw-kin pum-hik-holš-ul-at                              
                                                                                    
               some-PL   water-LOC jump-LOC-put.in-3PLS-PRET                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘Others went and jumped into the water.’                             
                                                                                    
               [Wāˊñ-hokpēˊmkin iˊcāk cakōˊñne okcĕkiaˊlat]                         
                                                                                    
          11)  wáŋhokpé·mkin iša·kšakkóŋne okšakyálat                               
                                                                                    
               waŋ-hok-ø-pe·m-kin       iša·k-šak-koŋ-ne                            
                                                                                    
               go.about-RECIP-3STATS-shoot-WHEN person-3PLO-sieze(sg)-GER           
                                                                                    
               ok-šak-yal-ø-at                                                      
                                                                                    
               COME.AND-3PLO-sieze(pl)- 3SS-PRET                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         329                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘When they were going about shooting at each other, the sheriff came and
                                                                                    
               arrested them.’                                                      
                                                                                    
               [Iˊcāk nīt aˊñlaˊkin cakinaˊ-uculat]                                 
                                                                                    
          12)  iša·k ní·t áŋlá·kkin šakináwšulat                                    
                                                                                    
               iša·k ni·t aŋla·k-kin šak-inawš-ul-at                                
                                                                                    
               man  five jail-LOC  3PLO-put.in-3PLS-PRET                            
                                                                                    
               ‘They put five men in jail.’                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               [kec lāt cakinaˊ-uculat]                                             
                                                                                    
          13)  kéš lá·t šakináwšulat                                                
                                                                                    
               keš       la·t šak-inawš-ul-at                                       
                                                                                    
               woman(pl) three 3PLO-put.in-3PLS-PRET                                
                                                                                    
               ‘They put three women in.’                                           
                                                                                    
               [Yil hiweˊ-u pētik yiˊl cakitaˊ-uculat]                              
                                                                                    
          14)  yilhiwéw pétik yíl šakhitáwšulat                                     
                                                                                    
               yilhiwew  petik     yil  šak-hitawš-ul-at                            
                                                                                    
               Sunday    (?)       day  3PLO-let.out-3PLS-PRET                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               ‘On Monday, they let them out.’                                      
                                                                                    
               [tanuˊk ik’huˊntan aˊñlaˊkin tiˊ(xt)]                                
                                                                                    
          15)  tanúk eykún tan áŋlá·kkin tíht                                       
                                                                                    
               tanuk eykun tan aŋla·k-kin tiht                                      
                                                                                    
               one  now  still jail-LOC lie(sg)                                     
                                                                                    
               ‘One is now still in jail.’                                          
                                                                                    
          Commentary.                                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         330                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Line 1. The word samtí is the Atakapa pronunciation of the French Samedi. Atakapa names of
                                                                                    
          only two of the days of the week are recorded: yílhiwéw ‘Sunday,’ and yílhiwéw pétik yíl
                                                                                    
          ‘Monday.’ Given that in other Southeastern languages the names of the days of the week are
                                                                                    
          based on ordinal numbers, and Atakapa lacks ordinal numbers, it is likely that the other names of
                                                                                    
          the days of the week were borrowed from French.                           
                                                                                    
          Line 2. Here, the word tánot ‘to the other’ is preaspirated: /táhnut/. Note that preaspiration does
                                                                                    
          not occur in the word tannéw ‘others’ in line 9, the process being blocked by the geminate
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          consonant.                                                                
                                                                                    
          Line 3. The verb wánc is a ditransitive verb meaning ‘to say something to someone,’ with one
                                                                                    
          object being the quoted speech, and the other being the person spoken to. This verb can also
                                                                                    
          mean ‘to tell a story to someone.’ Further on in line 5, the simple transitive verb wán is used just
                                                                                    
          to quote speech.                                                          
                                                                                    
          Line 5. Gatschet missed the initial syllable hi in the word hihaccíškišháh, but recorded it
                                                                                    
          correctly elsewhere in his field notes. The translation in the publication, “I don’t care,” is not
                                                                                    
          correct and gives the impression that such is what the second woman said, not the real situation
                                                                                    
          in which the first woman is still speaking. The second woman never says anything at all, simply
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          gets slapped on the mouth.                                                
                                                                                    
          Line 7. Because the focus of the narrative now shifts from the quarrel between the two women
                                                                                    
          to the general melee that broke out, the pronoun hakít ‘they’ appears in its focus form hakítiš.
                                                                                    
          Line 8. Here and in the following line the verbs containing reduplication with infixation add
                                                                                    
          liveliness to the narrative.                                              
                                                                                    
          Line 9-10. Note the syntactic construction “some…others…” tannéw…tannéw…. 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         331                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Line 10. The verb complex pumhikhólš is difficult. It is comprised of pum ‘to jump’ and hólš
                                                                                    
          ‘to put in,’ but the element –hik- is without explanation. The only other occurrence in the corpus
                                                                                    
          is Gatschet (1885a:215), where <John> pumhikhólkit given as the translation of the phrase ‘John
                                                                                    
          is jumping,’ and like many of the elicited terms therein lacks any contextual clues. It is just
                                                                                    
          possible that hik- is a locative verbal prefix meaning ‘action performed in water;’ certainly such
                                                                                    
          a locative verbal prefix occurs in other Southeastern languages, and the word hikú ‘soup; broth’
                                                                                    
          is suggestive, as are the verbs ikumákš ‘to dive into water;’ mákš ‘to dive,’ and ikháwš ‘to drown
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          something,’ which would be derived from hik- + káw ‘to die.’              
                                                                                    
          Line 14. The word pétik in the compound term for ‘Monday’ is derived using the ergative case
                                                                                    
          from the unique verb pét, ‘to be completed, to be over.’ Thus yilhiwéw pétik yíl means literally,
                                                                                    
          ‘the day with Sunday being over.’                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Notes                                                                     
                                                                                    
          1. Swanton added the m in parentheses, and gave the variant móyum in the dictionary for
                                                                                    
          ‘pumpkin.’ This word appears only as móyu in Gatschet’s text, and appears nowhere else in the
                                                                                    
          field notes. Swanton does not give his source for the variant.            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          2. Originally the line read {céc pû́m wacwáci pû́m cakéat púmulat} šé·š púm wašwáši púm
                                                                                    
          šakkéat púmulat ‘They had and danced the infants’ dance and the elders’ dance,’ but Gatschet
                                                                                    
          struck out šakkéat in red when he went over the text with Tottokš.        
                                                                                    
          3. In the field notes a faint k is scratched out in red here.             
                                                                                    
          4. Gatschet made an interlinear note here: “P.(Palnal) on middle lake, a great fornicator = had 3
                                                                                    
          wives.”                                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         332                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          5. In the field notes Gatschet added a macron over the last a, and separated the last syllable from
                                                                                    
          the word with red lines, mistaking that for the verb tá·t, which is actually found in the first
                                                                                    
          syllable.                                                                 
                                                                                    
          6. The clitic =n̥ was inserted later in red ink.                          
                                                                                    
          7. The gloss is given as the plural of šokiyáhi, šokšakiyáhi, meaing ‘they are ahead in regard to
                                                                                    
          things.’                                                                  
                                                                                    
          8. The verb iyáhi is confused in the dictionary portion of the publication with the verbs iyé ‘to be
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          more,’and iyáw ‘to hoist,’ and the verbal prefix hiyik- ‘upward motion.’ Frequent confusions of
                                                                                    
          this nature limit the usefulness of the dictionary.                       
                                                                                    
          9. On page 51 of Gatschet’s field notes her French name is so given.      
                                                                                    
          10. Gatschet seem to have inserted the i thinking that the first part of the word was the same as
                                                                                    
          the word for person, išá·k. He does not seem to have recognized the nominal plural prefix šak-.
                                                                                    
          11. There are a number of examples in Gatschet’s field notes of him writing t for k, and later
                                                                                    
          going back and correcting it.                                             
                                                                                    
          12. The phonetic sequence /mst/ must reflect the actual pronunciation /mn̥st/, as the consonant
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          cluster /mš/ is very frequent and never changes, while /n̥š/ always surfaces phonetically as /n̥s/.
                                                                                    
          13. Adele’s Indian name was probably Kišto·t, and Celanie’s name Kiškicaw.
                                                                                    
          14. Narcisse was also known as Narcisse Lo according to Gatschet’s notes; he was the grandson
                                                                                    
          of Chief Lo and his wife Fanchonette.                                     
                                                                                    
          15. This indicates that Kišmok lived in the village of Túl Núŋ, and that Tottokš was raised in the
                                                                                    
          village of Ló.                                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         333                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          16. The translation ‘End Lake’ found in the publication is not true to the Atakapa, where téw
                                                                                    
          means ‘upstream.’ Lake Charles is upstream of Lake Prien, where the last Atakapa villages
                                                                                    
          stood.                                                                    
                                                                                    
          17. He is also mentioned in a manuscript note by Swanton (1907a:141) “Villages at Little Lake
                                                                                    
          [Lake Prien], Lake Charles & English Bayou. cakuhúi [Šukuhúy] Indian name of Eliza’s
                                                                                    
          father.” Eliza must be the English name of one of the five daughters of Šukuhúy. She is perhaps
                                                                                    
          the Eliza Verdaine, cousin of Tottokš, mentioned by Gatchet in his field notes (1885b:148)
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          18. Although this description is somewhat elliptical, it suggests that Kiletkiš, mother of Tottokš,
                                                                                    
          lived with her father Šukuhuy in the village of Ló, and then moved across the lake to the village
                                                                                    
          of Túl Núŋ after her father and first husband died and she had married Cyprien. It also helps
                                                                                    
          explain how Tottokš knew Kišmok (Text 5) so well, as the latter was already living in Túl Núŋ.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         334                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          REFERENCES                                                                
                                                                                    
          Bartlett, John Russell. 1848. Miscellaneous vocabularies of 32 different tribes. Manuscript 1627,
                                                                                    
               National Anthropological Archives, Smithsonian Institution.          
                                                                                    
          Campbell, Lyle. 1997. The Historical Linguistics of Native America. Oxford University Press.
                                                                                    
          Chafe, Wallace. n.d. [Caddo-English / English-Caddo vocabulary]           
                                                                                    
          ------. 2018. The Caddo Language. Petoskey, MI: Mundart Press.            
                                                                                    
          de Villiers du Terrage, Rivet Paul. 1919. Les Indiens du Texas et les expéditions françaises de
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               1720 et 1721 à la « Baie Saint-Bernard ». In: Journal de la Société des Américanistes.
                                                                                    
               Tome 11, pp. 403-442.                                                
                                                                                    
          Dixon, R. M. W. 1994. Ergativity. Cambridge: University of Cambridge Press.
                                                                                    
          Dorsey, James O., and John R. Swanton. 1912. A Dictionary of the Biloxi and Ofo Languages.
                                                                                    
               Washington DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.                      
                                                                                    
          Fitzgerald, Colleen M. 2016. “Morphology in the Muskogean Languages.” Language and
                                                                                    
               Linguistics Compass: 681–700                                         
                                                                                    
          Gallatin, Albert. 1836. A Synopsis of the Indian Tribes of North America, In: Archaeologia
                                                                                    
               Americana: Transactions and Collections of the American Antiquarian Society. Volume
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               II. Cambridge: Folson, Wells, and Thurston, 1-422.                   
                                                                                    
          Gatschet, Albert S. 1885a. Atákapa Language. Manuscript 239a, National Anthropological
                                                                                    
               Archives, Smithsonian Institution.                                   
                                                                                    
          ------. 1885b. Atákapa. Part of Manuscript 239b, National Anthropological Archives,
                                                                                    
               Smithsonian Institution.                                             
                                                                                    
          ------. 1885c. Atákapa; Remarks to Linguistic Collection; 1885. Part of Manuscript 239b,
                                                                                    
               National Anthropological Archives, Smithsonian Institution.          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         335                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ------. 1885d. The Atakapa Language. The Lake Charles Echo, 14 February 1885.
                                                                                    
          ------. 1903. Brief notes on the Louisiana tribes Manuscript 904, National Anthropological
                                                                                    
               Archives, Smithsonian Institution.                                   
                                                                                    
          Gatschet, Albert S., and John R. Swanton. 1932. A Dictionary of the Atakapa Language
                                                                                    
               accompanied by Text Material. Washington DC: Government Printing Office.
                                                                                    
          Gursky, Karl-Heinz. 1965. Lexical Similarities between Caddoan and Algonkian-Gulf.
                                                                                    
               Anthropological Linguistics, 104–109.                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ------. 1969. A Lexical Comparison of the Atakapa, Chitimacha, and Tunica Languages.
                                                                                    
               International Journal of American Linguistics, 83-107.               
                                                                                    
          Haas, Mary R. 1940a. Ablaut and its function in Muskogee. Language, 141-50.
                                                                                    
          ------. 1940b. Tunica. New York: J.J. Augustin.                           
                                                                                    
          ------. 1951. The Proto-Gulf Word for ‘Water’ (With Notes on Siouan-Yuchi). International
                                                                                    
               Journal of American Linguistics, 71–79.                              
                                                                                    
          ------. 1952. The Proto-Gulf Word for ‘Land’ (With a Note on Proto-Siouan). International
                                                                                    
               Journal of American Linguistics, 238–240.                            
                                                                                    
          ------. 1958. A New Linguistic Relationship in North America: Algonkian and the Gulf
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Languages. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 231-264.            
                                                                                    
          Hardy, Donald K. 2005. Creek. In: Hardy, Heather K. and Scancarelli, Janine, eds., Native
                                                                                    
               Languages of the Southeastern United States. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press,
                                                                                    
               201-245.                                                             
                                                                                    
          Hieber, Daniel W. 2019a. Semantic Alignment in Chitimacha. International Journal of
                                                                                    
               American Linguistics, 313-63.                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         336                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          -----. 2019b. Ergativity in Chitimacha. Paper presented at the conference of the Society for the
                                                                                    
               Study of the Indigenous Languages of the Americas.                   
                                                                                    
          Hoijer, Harry. 1933. Tonkawa: an Indian Language of Texas. New York: Columbia University
                                                                                    
               Press.                                                               
                                                                                    
          ------. 1949. An Analytical Dictionary of the Tonkawa Language. Berkeley: University of
                                                                                    
               California Press.                                                    
                                                                                    
          Kaufman, David V. 2014. Another look at Atakapa. Kansas Working Papers in Linguistics, 72
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               -78.                                                                 
                                                                                    
          ------. 2019a. Atakapa Ishakkoy Dictionary. Chicago: Exploration Press.   
                                                                                    
          ------. 2019b. Clues to Lower Mississippi Valley Histories: Language, Archaeology, and
                                                                                    
               Ethnography. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.                  
                                                                                    
          Kimball, Geoffrey. 1989. Koasati Comparative Constructions. Kansas Working Papers in
                                                                                    
               Linguistics, 47-56.                                                  
                                                                                    
          ------. 1991. Koasati Grammar. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.     
                                                                                    
          ------. 2005. Natchez. In: Hardy, Heather K. and Scancarelli, Janine, eds., Native Languages of
                                                                                    
               the Southeastern United States. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 385-453.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ------. 2010. Koasati Traditional Narratives. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
                                                                                    
          ------. 2013. The Woman Who Was a Fox: The Structure of a Natchez Oral Narrative.
                                                                                    
               International Journal of American Linguistics, 421-437.              
                                                                                    
          Martin, Jack. 1993. “Inalienable Possession" in Creek (And Its Possible Origin). International
                                                                                    
               Journal of American Linguistics, 442-452.                            
                                                                                    
          Melnar, Lynette R. 2004. Caddo Verb Morphology. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         337                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Mithun, Marianne. 2001. The Languages of Native North America. Cambridge University
                                                                                    
               Press.                                                               
                                                                                    
          ------. 2017. Language Isolates of North America. In: Language Isolates, Lyle Campbell, ed.
                                                                                    
               London: Routledge.                                                   
                                                                                    
          Munro, Pamela. 1984. The Syntactic Status of Object Possessor Raising in Western
                                                                                    
               Muskogean. Proceedings of the Tenth Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics
                                                                                    
               Society, 634-649.                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ------. 1994. Gulf and Yuki-Gulf. Anthropological Linguistics, 125-222    
                                                                                    
          ------. 2005. Chickasaw. In: Hardy, Heather K. and Scancarelli, Janine, eds., Native Languages
                                                                                    
               of the Southeastern United States. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 114-156.
                                                                                    
          Post, Lauren C. 1962. Some Notes on the Attakapas Indians of Southwest Louisiana. Louisiana
                                                                                    
               History: The Journal of the Louisiana Historical Association¸ 221-242.
                                                                                    
          Sibley, John. 1805. Historical Sketches of the Several Indian Tribes in Louisiana. In: American
                                                                                    
               State Papers: Documents Legislative and Executive of the Congress of the United States,
                                                                                    
               Vol. 4, 1832. Washington DC: Gales and Seaton, 721-25.               
                                                                                    
          Singleton, Hubert Daniel. 2000a. Grammar of the Atakapa Language; Abridged. Hammond
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               LA:The Author.                                                       
                                                                                    
          ---------. 2000b. Language of the Atakapa Indians: A Primer. Hammond LA:The Author.
                                                                                    
          Swadesh, Morris. 1946a. Chitimacha. In: Linguistic Structures of Native America, 312-336.
                                                                                    
          ------. 1946b. Phonologic Formulas for Atakapa-Chitimacha. International Journal of American
                                                                                    
               Linguistics, 113-132.                                                
                                                                                    
          ------. 1947. Atakapa-Chitimacha *kʷ. International Journal of American Linguistics, 120-21
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         338                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ------. 1950a. Chitimacha Vocabulary. Typescript ms in the collection of the American
                                                                                    
               Philosophical Society                                                
                                                                                    
          ------. 1950b. Chitimacha Texts. Typescript ms in the collection of the American Philosophical
                                                                                    
               Society                                                              
                                                                                    
          Swanton, John R. 1907a. Southeast Ethnographic and Vocabulary Notes. Manuscript 4201,
                                                                                    
               National Anthropological Archives, Smithsonian Institution.          
                                                                                    
          ------. 1907b. Mythology of the Indians of Louisiana and the Texas Coast. The Journal of
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               American Folklore, 285-289.                                          
                                                                                    
          ------. 1911. Indian Tribes of the Lower Mississippi Valley and the Adjacent Coast of the Gulf of
                                                                                    
               Mexico. Washington DC: Government Printing Office.                   
                                                                                    
          ------. 1919. A structural and lexical comparison of the Tunica, Chitimacha, and Atakapa
                                                                                    
               languages. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin. 68:1–56.           
                                                                                    
          ------. 1929. A Sketch of the Atakapa Language. International Journal of American Linguistics,
                                                                                    
               121-149.                                                             
                                                                                    
          Wagner, Günter. 1934. Yuchi. New York: Columbia University Press.         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         339                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                            YUKHÍTI – ENGLISH VOCABULARY                            
                                                                                    
               The vocabulary contains all the words found in Gatschet and Swanton (1932), as well as
                                                                                    
          those few words missed by Swanton, but to be found in the original field notes of Albert S.
                                                                                    
          Gatschet. The words are given in their phonemically reconstructed forms, including vowel
                                                                                    
          length and accentuation. In the alphabetical order, long vowels precede short vowels, the
                                                                                    
          phoneme n̥ is placed after n, and the phoneme ƛ and its variant ł are placed after t. The sounds s
                                                                                    
          and š are alphabetized together.                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               A compound word is listed under the basic elements that make up the compound. In
                                                                                    
          cases where an element does not occur as an independent word, it is listed without a definition.
                                                                                    
          A few words are reconstructed whenever they can clearly be derived from an attested word.
                                                                                    
          These reconstructed words are marked with an asterisk.                    
                                                                                    
               The following are the abbreviations used:                            
                                                                                    
          adj       adjective                                                       
                                                                                    
          adv       adverb                                                          
                                                                                    
          deic      deictic                                                         
                                                                                    
          intj      interjection                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          iv        intransitive verb                                               
                                                                                    
          n         noun                                                            
                                                                                    
          pp        postposition                                                    
                                                                                    
          pro       pronoun                                                         
                                                                                    
          sv        stative verb                                                    
                                                                                    
          tv        transitive verb                                                 
                                                                                    
          var       variant form                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         340                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          A                                         
                                                                                    
          á deic this; these                                                        
                                                                                    
           ayíl adv today                                                           
                                                                                    
          á part question word                                                      
                                                                                    
          ác n sweat                                                                
                                                                                    
           ácáŋ n sweat-house                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          áck sv to sweat                                                           
                                                                                    
          áh v to grow (inanimate)                                                  
                                                                                    
          ahinák iv to be like; to be as if (var. hinák)                            
                                                                                    
           ahinákka adv 1. so; 2. ago (var. hinákka)                                
                                                                                    
          ák n juice; sap                                                           
                                                                                    
           ákip cók n anhinga                                                       
                                                                                    
          ák sv to be unripe (pl ákak) (var. ákš, pl. ákšakš)                       
                                                                                    
           cóhoc ákš n green corn                                                   
                                                                                    
          akcáw sv 1. to be cold; chilly; 2. to be clear; transparent (var. akcáwš) 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           akcáwš n head cold (loan translation from English)                       
                                                                                    
          akilík sv to be wet (var. akilikš)                                        
                                                                                    
           akilíkiš v to make something wet (var. ikilíkš)                          
                                                                                    
          akipáy n south                                                            
                                                                                    
          ákitoš n frog                                                             
                                                                                    
           ákitoš nalmáŋmaŋ n spring frog                                           
                                                                                    
          ákmalš n winter                                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         341                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           akmálš sv to be winter                                                   
                                                                                    
           ákmalštíc n autumn; fall season                                          
                                                                                    
          aknák sv to flow, of water                                                
                                                                                    
           áknak n current                                                          
                                                                                    
            áknak mišké·š n eddy                                                    
                                                                                    
          akóp n flour                                                              
                                                                                    
           cóhoc akóp n corn meal                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          áˑl n meat; flesh                                                         
                                                                                    
           áˑl áˑm n boiled meat                                                    
                                                                                    
           áˑl hoppáy n butcher                                                     
                                                                                    
           áˑl icáy n beefsteak (var. áˑl icayne)                                   
                                                                                    
           áˑl kác n scab                                                           
                                                                                    
           áˑl tíw n broiled meat (traditionally on a scaffold)                     
                                                                                    
            áˑl tíwne n gridiron                                                    
                                                                                    
           áˑl ƛóp n stick on which to roast meat                                   
                                                                                    
           áˑl wák n roasted meat (traditionally on a rope or cord)                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            áˑl wákne n meat roaster                                                
                                                                                    
           túc komá·l n calf of leg                                                 
                                                                                    
          áleman n German (< French Allemand)                                       
                                                                                    
          áliŋ n grapes                                                             
                                                                                    
           áliŋ iškám n large grapes                                                
                                                                                    
           áliŋ išó·m n small grapes                                                
                                                                                    
            áliŋ išó·m téy n vine of small grapes                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         342                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          alpamú n Alabama (< Alabama albaamo)                                      
                                                                                    
           alpamú išáˑk n Alabama Indian                                            
                                                                                    
          álš n ice                                                                 
                                                                                    
           álš kómi n thick ice                                                     
                                                                                    
           álš páhš n thin ice                                                      
                                                                                    
           álš šappác n icicle                                                      
                                                                                    
           álš tókš n chunk of ice                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          álš sv to be freezing weather                                             
                                                                                    
          áˑm tv to cook something; to boil something                               
                                                                                    
           šokáˑm iv to cook                                                        
                                                                                    
            šokáˑm n cook                                                           
                                                                                    
            šokáˑmáŋ n kitchen                                                      
                                                                                    
          ám iv to drink                                                            
                                                                                    
           ámi tv to give someone to drink                                          
                                                                                    
           ámne n drink; beverage                                                   
                                                                                    
            šokatkíŋiš ámne n blackberry brandy (var. šokatkíŋiš kicáˑk)            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           *ámš tv to cause someone to drink                                        
                                                                                    
            ámšne n cup; dipper (var. ámšnan)                                       
                                                                                    
              kapó ámšnan n drinking cup                                            
                                                                                    
              lúik ka ámšne n pottery cup                                           
                                                                                    
              yukhíti ka ámšne n Indian-made cup                                    
                                                                                    
           kawkáw ámne n drinking water                                             
                                                                                    
           kicá·k ám hitéw n whiskey or brandy drinker                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         343                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kicá·k amkáw sv to be drunk (var. kicá·k káw)                            
                                                                                    
          án intj no! (var. áŋaŋ)                                                   
                                                                                    
          án n ear                                                                  
                                                                                    
           ánhatkómš n earring                                                      
                                                                                    
           anhipón n rabbit; sheep                                                  
                                                                                    
            anhipón náw n wool                                                      
                                                                                    
            anhipón tíl n rabbit skin                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           ánmaŋmaŋ n mule                                                          
                                                                                    
           anpákš n mouse                                                           
                                                                                    
            anpákš héc n rat                                                        
                                                                                    
           ánpanš n deaf person                                                     
                                                                                    
          ánanuy n bullfrog                                                         
                                                                                    
          antú n owl                                                                
                                                                                    
          áŋ n house                                                                
                                                                                    
           áŋhicón n room                                                           
                                                                                    
           áŋhiwéw n church (var. áŋhiwéw inihne)                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           áŋkat n door                                                             
                                                                                    
            áŋkat mók n window (pl áŋkat mokmók)                                    
                                                                                    
              áŋkat mók ucúc ka n pointed window (pl áŋkat mokmók ucúc ka)          
                                                                                    
           áŋkóš n corner of a house                                                
                                                                                    
           áŋlaˑk n jail                                                            
                                                                                    
           aŋláˑkišne n key; lock                                                   
                                                                                    
           áŋ šakkópišne n whitewash; white paint                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         344                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           áŋ wáˑl n house-wall                                                     
                                                                                    
           ácáŋ n sweat-house                                                       
                                                                                    
           canúkáŋ n barn                                                           
                                                                                    
           cóhocáŋ n corn-crib                                                      
                                                                                    
           néš áŋ n wooden house                                                    
                                                                                    
           néškiŋštámšáŋ n sawmill                                                  
                                                                                    
           néˑwayáŋ n brick house                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           poháŋ n smokehouse                                                       
                                                                                    
           póškáŋ n veins                                                           
                                                                                    
           šokóyáŋ n courthouse                                                     
                                                                                    
           šokšakyíkšáŋ n storehouse; store                                         
                                                                                    
           šókšukšáŋ n dance house (located in the village of Lo)                   
                                                                                    
           wayáŋ n stone house                                                      
                                                                                    
          aŋkátš v to play (sg)                                                     
                                                                                    
           aŋkámš v to play (pl)                                                    
                                                                                    
            aŋkámšne n plaything; toy                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          áp n here (see áwp)                                                       
                                                                                    
          ášk n shadow                                                              
                                                                                    
           *áškiš tv to shade something                                             
                                                                                    
             hatáškiš iv to shade oneself                                           
                                                                                    
              hatáškišne n parasol                                                  
                                                                                    
          ášt n reed                                                                
                                                                                    
          atákapa n Atakapa (var. tákapa) < Choctaw hattak apa                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         345                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          atkáki adv ago                                                            
                                                                                    
          áƚiš sv to lose something                                                 
                                                                                    
          áw n here                                                                 
                                                                                    
             iv to be here                                                          
                                                                                    
          áwp n right here                                                          
                                                                                    
          áwš sv not to be able to do (positive úhc)                                
                                                                                    
          áy n swamp                                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           áy kóck n pond; marsh                                                    
                                                                                    
           áyip adv in the swamp                                                    
                                                                                    
            áyip téłk tálkop n marsh lily                                           
                                                                                    
            kónan áyip n duck potato (var. áyip kónan) (Sagittaria lancifolia)      
                                                                                    
            nohámš áyip n gallinule                                                 
                                                                                    
           tú áy n canebrake                                                        
                                                                                    
           tút áy n cypress swamp                                                   
                                                                                    
          ayának adv now                                                            
                                                                                    
          ayíl adv today                                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          C                                         
                                                                                    
          cáˑc tv to crack something                                                
                                                                                    
           cáˑc óc n walnut                                                         
                                                                                    
           haccá·c iv to crack, of wood                                             
                                                                                    
          các n lungs                                                               
                                                                                    
          cáhš tv to crack something                                                
                                                                                    
          cahtá n Choctaw (Choctaw čahta)                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         346                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          cák tv to fill something (a hole)                                         
                                                                                    
          cák sv to be dry; to become dry (pl cákcak)                               
                                                                                    
           cáki tv to dry something                                                 
                                                                                    
           cákš tv to dry something (sg)                                            
                                                                                    
            haccákšne n drying implement                                            
                                                                                    
              íˑt haccákšne n towel                                                 
                                                                                    
            *cámš tv to dry something (pl)                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
              wóˑš haccámšne n hand towel                                           
                                                                                    
          cákš tv to chew something                                                 
                                                                                    
          cál tv to break something of glass (var. cáłš)                            
                                                                                    
          cálš iv to stamp                                                          
                                                                                    
           calcálš iv to stamp repeatedly                                           
                                                                                    
          cáłi iv for something of glass to crack or break                          
                                                                                    
          cám tv to bite something (pl?) (cf. cáw)                                  
                                                                                    
          camakúc n crawfish (var. cimákuc)                                         
                                                                                    
          cán tv to hide something                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          canúk n horse                                                             
                                                                                    
           canúkáŋ n stable                                                         
                                                                                    
           canukišó·m n colts                                                       
                                                                                    
           canúk itéw iv to ride a horse (pl. canúk šakitéw)                        
                                                                                    
           canúk kíš n mare                                                         
                                                                                    
           canúk šakyóŋš n horsefly                                                 
                                                                                    
          cáŋ tv to steal something from someone                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         347                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           šokšakcáŋš n thief                                                       
                                                                                    
          cáŋš tv to push something; to squeeze something out; to knead something   
                                                                                    
          cáˑt iv to move quickly                                                   
                                                                                    
           káwca·t iv to fly quickly                                                
                                                                                    
           paknáwcá·t iv to run quickly                                             
                                                                                    
           pólpolšcá·t iv to gallop quickly                                         
                                                                                    
           šiwcá·t iv to crawl quickly                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           támca·t iv to climb quickly                                              
                                                                                    
           úšcá·t iv to be really moving quickly                                    
                                                                                    
          cáthé n poison vine with a root resembling duck potato                    
                                                                                    
          cátn̥ adv afterwards                                                      
                                                                                    
          cáw tv to bite something (sg?) (c.f. cám)                                 
                                                                                    
          cáycayš iv to tremble from cold or fear                                   
                                                                                    
          cáyon n Mexican (<French Espagnol or Spanish Español)                     
                                                                                    
           cáyon néˑ n Mexico; Texas                                                
                                                                                    
          céˑŋ iv to be proud (of women only)                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kíš céˑŋ n a proud woman (pl kíš céŋceˑŋ)                                
                                                                                    
          cí n bone                                                                 
                                                                                    
           hálcí n spine                                                            
                                                                                    
           ócci n jawbone                                                           
                                                                                    
           túccí n shinbone and ankle                                               
                                                                                    
           cóhoc wa·kcí n corncob                                                   
                                                                                    
          cíˑci n tobacco pipe (var. cít cišt)                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         348                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           wáy cíˑci n stone pipe                                                   
                                                                                    
          cíci n baby; infant (pl šéˑš) (var. cíš)                                  
                                                                                    
           cicíš iv to be a baby                                                    
                                                                                    
          cíˑk n two                                                                
                                                                                    
           cíˑkip adv twice                                                         
                                                                                    
            hál cí·kip adv twice more                                               
                                                                                    
           cíˑksim sv to be two apiece; two to each                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           cíˑkštan n both                                                          
                                                                                    
          cikát adv ago                                                             
                                                                                    
          cikátip pp between                                                        
                                                                                    
          cikhól n twins                                                            
                                                                                    
          cikilíkš iv to tickle                                                     
                                                                                    
          cíkip n little blue heron                                                 
                                                                                    
          cíl sv to be proud (men only, cf. céŋ) (pl. cílcil)                       
                                                                                    
          cíl sv to be rusty (usually haccíl)                                       
                                                                                    
           haccíl sv to be rusty                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           šokcíl n rusty thing                                                     
                                                                                    
          cílack n tick                                                             
                                                                                    
           cílack išó·m n seed ticks                                                
                                                                                    
          cilá·m n meadowlark                                                       
                                                                                    
          ciná·š n button                                                           
                                                                                    
          cipál iv to be sticky                                                     
                                                                                    
           cipálš tv to stick something together                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         349                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           šokcipál n glue                                                          
                                                                                    
           tancipál n small cocklebur (cf. pamhokáy)                                
                                                                                    
          cípš iv to move one’s residence                                           
                                                                                    
          cíš n baby (pl šéˑš) (var. cíci)                                          
                                                                                    
          cíšt n pipe                                                               
                                                                                    
           cít cišt n tobacco pipe (var. cíˑci)                                     
                                                                                    
          cít n tobacco                                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           cít cišt n tobacco pipe (var. cíˑci)                                     
                                                                                    
           cík katké n a chew of tobacco                                            
                                                                                    
           cít ƛúkšne n tobacco pipe                                                
                                                                                    
           cít wošyínc n cigar; cigarette                                           
                                                                                    
           cít yínc iv to wrap tobacco into a cigar                                 
                                                                                    
          ciwáŋ sv to suffer from dizziness or vertigo                              
                                                                                    
          ciwáŋiš tv to move something; to stir something                           
                                                                                    
           hacciwáŋiš iv to wiggle                                                  
                                                                                    
          cóhoc n corn                                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           cóhoc akóp n corn meal                                                   
                                                                                    
           cóhoc ákš n green corn                                                   
                                                                                    
           cóhocáŋ n corn-crib                                                      
                                                                                    
           cóhoc ém n pounded corn                                                  
                                                                                    
           cóhoc hílšne n corn sieve                                                
                                                                                    
           cóhocíš n proper name of a chief living on Lake Prien                    
                                                                                    
           cóhoc líline n corn mill                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         350                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           cóhoc neˑyuš n cornfield                                                 
                                                                                    
           cóhoc óc n grain of corn                                                 
                                                                                    
           cóhoc tál n cornhusk                                                     
                                                                                    
           cóhoc wá·k n ear of corn                                                 
                                                                                    
            cóhoc wa·kcí n corncob                                                  
                                                                                    
           cóhoc wáš n corn leaves; corn husks                                      
                                                                                    
           cóhoc yáhne n corn borer; corn weevil                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          cók n blackbird                                                           
                                                                                    
           ákip cók n anhinga                                                       
                                                                                    
           cók táy n Bayou Dinde                                                    
                                                                                    
          cómš                                                                      
                                                                                    
           néš cómš n cane, walking stick; club                                     
                                                                                    
          cóŋš tv to knead something                                                
                                                                                    
          copcópš sv to be spotted in colors                                        
                                                                                    
          cošíŋš n chills                                                           
                                                                                    
           cošíŋš hišláwš n malaria                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          cóˑt iv to stand (pl) (sg. táˑt)                                          
                                                                                    
          cucál tv to kick something                                                
                                                                                    
          cúh n claw; nail                                                          
                                                                                    
           hikáˑt cúh n toenail                                                     
                                                                                    
           wóš cúh n fingernail                                                     
                                                                                    
          cúkcukš sv to be bumpy; rough; rugged                                     
                                                                                    
          cúkš n cardinal                                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         351                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          cúm tv to pinch something                                                 
                                                                                    
           *cúmš tv to cause something to pinch something                           
                                                                                    
            šokšakcúmšne n tweezers (var. šokšaccúmšne)                             
                                                                                    
                                          E                                         
                                                                                    
          ehéw n sweetgum                                                           
                                                                                    
           ehéw néš n sweetgum tree                                                 
                                                                                    
          ém tv to pound something                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           cóhoc ém n pounded corn                                                  
                                                                                    
          enkéwišt n prairie chicken Tympanuchus cupido (makes the sound om hú hú hú)
                                                                                    
          é·ŋ n name                                                                
                                                                                    
          éŋ n grease; fat                                                          
                                                                                    
           *éŋiš v to make grease                                                   
                                                                                    
            okišó·m éŋišne n wax                                                    
                                                                                    
           éŋkáwne šiht n grease jar                                                
                                                                                    
           éŋš v to be greasy                                                       
                                                                                    
           éŋtímnan n candle                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           hiyénéŋ n bacon; lard                                                    
                                                                                    
           nešéŋ n soap                                                             
                                                                                    
           nešmuŋéŋ n pine resin; tar                                               
                                                                                    
           nikéŋ n butter                                                           
                                                                                    
           temák éŋš n kneecap                                                      
                                                                                    
           yilhiwéwéŋ n Mardi Gras                                                  
                                                                                    
          éˑt n chin                                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         352                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          eykún adv just now                                                        
                                                                                    
           eykúnnak adv beginning                                                   
                                                                                    
           eykún tán adv still                                                      
                                                                                    
                                          H                                         
                                                                                    
          há pro he; she; it                                                        
                                                                                    
           ha poss his; hers; its                                                   
                                                                                    
           ha núk pro himself; herself; itself                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           hakít pro they                                                           
                                                                                    
                poss their                                                          
                                                                                    
            hakít núk pro themselves                                                
                                                                                    
              hakít cíˑk núk pro the two of themselves                              
                                                                                    
           háiš pro as for him/her/it (var ha·š)                                    
                                                                                    
          haccá·c iv to crack, of wood [root hat-cá·c]                              
                                                                                    
          haccákš iv to gargle [root -cákš]                                         
                                                                                    
          haccewwán sv to forget something                                          
                                                                                    
           haccewwániš tv to forget something belonging to someone                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          haccíškiš sv to be pleased; to be glad                                    
                                                                                    
          hacciwáŋiš iv to wiggle [root -ciwáŋ-]                                    
                                                                                    
          hacehéš sv to be bad (sg)                                                 
                                                                                    
           šoktéy hacehéš n poison                                                  
                                                                                    
            šoktéy hacehéš hólš tv to bewitch someone                               
                                                                                    
           océh šoktéy hacehéš n snake venom                                        
                                                                                    
           haceméš sv to be bad (pl)                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         353                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            kóy haceméš n slander                                                   
                                                                                    
          háh sv not to exist                                                       
                                                                                    
           háhan iv there is not (var. há·n)                                        
                                                                                    
          háha intj yes!                                                            
                                                                                    
          háhš sv not to have                                                       
                                                                                    
           há·n ger not having; not existing                                        
                                                                                    
          hahuwí·t adv previously                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          hál n back                                                                
                                                                                    
           hál hé·š n backache                                                      
                                                                                    
           hálkin adv afterwards                                                    
                                                                                    
           hálcí n spine                                                            
                                                                                    
           óc hálkin n back teeth                                                   
                                                                                    
          hál pp behind                                                             
                                                                                    
           hál iv to be behind                                                      
                                                                                    
              sv to be last in line                                                 
                                                                                    
          hál adv again; -teen in counting                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           hálšukíŋ n one-half                                                      
                                                                                    
           hál tanúkip adv once more                                                
                                                                                    
           hál cí·kip adv twice more                                                
                                                                                    
           wošpé hací·k n twelve                                                    
                                                                                    
           wošpé hál himatól n fourteen (var. wošpé hahimatól)                      
                                                                                    
           wošpé hál tanúk n eleven (var. wošpé hatanúk)                            
                                                                                    
             wošpé hatanúkip adv eleven times                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         354                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            wošpé halá·t n thirteen                                                 
                                                                                    
          hál adj next; second; again; more                                         
                                                                                    
           hál cí·kip adv twice more                                                
                                                                                    
           hál itiyílš adv next month                                               
                                                                                    
           hál tanúkip adv once more                                                
                                                                                    
          há·n iv there is not; not to exist                                        
                                                                                    
          hán tv to fail to do something                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          háŋš tv to finish something; to end doing something                       
                                                                                    
          hataki                                                                    
                                                                                    
           hatakinán n beads                                                        
                                                                                    
           hatakinán óŋi n string of beads                                          
                                                                                    
          hateláŋš iv to be still; to be quiet                                      
                                                                                    
           hateláŋšnakhateláŋš iv to be very still and quiet                        
                                                                                    
          hathópš sv to be hollow                                                   
                                                                                    
          hatíc iv to wake up [root -ic]                                            
                                                                                    
          hatinúš iv to hide [root -inu-]                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          hatipáciš iv to turn a somersault                                         
                                                                                    
          hatítikómš n apron                                                        
                                                                                    
          hatitólš iv to dress [root -itolš]                                        
                                                                                    
          hatka                                                                     
                                                                                    
           hatkanán n pillow (var. hatkáne)                                         
                                                                                    
            hatkanán káwš n pillowcase (var. hatkáne káwšne)                        
                                                                                    
          hatkayiš                                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         355                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           hatkáyišne n suspenders                                                  
                                                                                    
            náw kokkóp hatkáyišne n garters                                         
                                                                                    
            tíl hatkáyišne n belt                                                   
                                                                                    
          hatké n ring                                                              
                                                                                    
          hatkókiš tv to bend an elbow, knee, or other body part                    
                                                                                    
          hatkolkó·lš iv to rub oneself [root -kó·l-]                               
                                                                                    
           wó·š hatkolkó·lš iv to rub one’s hands                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          hatlá·ki iv to strain oneself                                             
                                                                                    
          hatláš iv to shave                                                        
                                                                                    
           katnáw hatlášne n razor                                                  
                                                                                    
          hatlútiš iv to blow one’s nose                                            
                                                                                    
          hatmišké·š iv to spread around in a circle                                
                                                                                    
           né· hatmišké·š n horizon                                                 
                                                                                    
          hatmolmóliš iv to gargle                                                  
                                                                                    
          hatnáh n so much; how much?                                               
                                                                                    
           hatnáhip adv how many times?                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           hatnáh sv to be how (interrogative only)                                 
                                                                                    
           hatnáhka adv how?                                                        
                                                                                    
            hatnáhka máŋ adv how long?                                              
                                                                                    
            hatnáhka pél adv how far?                                               
                                                                                    
           hatnáh n a little bit                                                    
                                                                                    
            payhatnáhuš sv to be too little                                         
                                                                                    
          hatnáˑkš iv to listen                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         356                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          hatpacpáciš iv to flutter the wings                                       
                                                                                    
          hatpáhiš iv to open, of a flower                                          
                                                                                    
          hatpáhš iv to listen                                                      
                                                                                    
          hatpáˑšne n armor                                                         
                                                                                    
          hatpáw iv to eddy                                                         
                                                                                    
          hatpáwiš tv to swing oneself; to whirl about                              
                                                                                    
           hatpáwišne n swing                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          hatpéh sv to be ready                                                     
                                                                                    
          hatpéni tv to have enough of something                                    
                                                                                    
          hatpunpúns n porpoise                                                     
                                                                                    
          hatšákš iv to wipe oneself with a cloth                                   
                                                                                    
          hatšimá·l iv to be coiled up                                              
                                                                                    
          hatšóšólš iv to be afraid                                                 
                                                                                    
          hattíc iv to contend                                                      
                                                                                    
           šokóy hattíc iv to go to court                                           
                                                                                    
          hatúhc tv to remember something                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           hatúhciš iv to learn                                                     
                                                                                    
          hatuckáwšne n veil over the face at birth; caul                           
                                                                                    
          hatutúne n glass; mirror                                                  
                                                                                    
           hatutúne áŋkatpans n window glass                                        
                                                                                    
          hatwén iv to pray                                                         
                                                                                    
          hatwíliš iv to rock                                                       
                                                                                    
          hatwíw iv to consider oneself                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         357                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          hatyanyáns iv to be wild                                                  
                                                                                    
          háw n snow                                                                
                                                                                    
           háw iškám n hail                                                         
                                                                                    
           háw hicón n sleet                                                        
                                                                                    
           háw sv to snow                                                           
                                                                                    
            háwkómi iv to snow heavily                                              
                                                                                    
          háyhayš iv to weep; to neigh, of a horse                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                 sv to burst into tears                                             
                                                                                    
          háyu iv to laugh (with directional case, to laugh at someone)             
                                                                                    
           hayháyu iv to laugh repeatedly                                           
                                                                                    
          hé iv to be strong-tasting; bitter                                        
                                                                                    
           cáthé n poison vine with a root resembling duck potato                   
                                                                                    
           hénakhé iv to be very bitter                                             
                                                                                    
           kawkáw hé n seawater                                                     
                                                                                    
          héc sv to be big; large                                                   
                                                                                    
              iv to grow large                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           inkilíš yilhiwéw héc n Christmas                                         
                                                                                    
           kiwílš yilhiwéw héc n New Year’s Day                                     
                                                                                    
           páyš héc n axe                                                           
                                                                                    
           péˑm héc n cannon                                                        
                                                                                    
           tolkimákišt héc n breast pin                                             
                                                                                    
           túl héc n Calcasieu Lake                                                 
                                                                                    
           wóš héc n thumb                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         358                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           yilhiwéw héc n holiday                                                   
                                                                                    
          héh sv to ache; to hurt                                                   
                                                                                    
           hehhéh sv to ache repeatedly or continuously                             
                                                                                    
           héh ka tv to hurt someone                                                
                                                                                    
          hehéš iv to be dawn; to be morning                                        
                                                                                    
          héš iv to ache; to be painful (pl. hehéš)                                 
                                                                                    
           komhéš n colic; diarrhea                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          héw sv to be many                                                         
                                                                                    
           héwhatwíw sv to think much of oneself                                    
                                                                                    
           héwip adv many times                                                     
                                                                                    
           héwš sv to have many of something                                        
                                                                                    
           tockoyhéw n mockingbird                                                  
                                                                                    
           túc héw n centipede                                                      
                                                                                    
          héwš tv to curse someone; to reproach someone                             
                                                                                    
          hí n wind; storm                                                          
                                                                                    
           hí lá·k n hurricane                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          hicám iv to be joined                                                     
                                                                                    
           hicámš tv to join something; to connect something                        
                                                                                    
           ók hicám n double blanket                                                
                                                                                    
          hicón sv to be small (inanimate)                                          
                                                                                    
               iv to lessen; grow small; to wane, of the moon                       
                                                                                    
           áŋhicón n room                                                           
                                                                                    
           háw hicón n sleet                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         359                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           hicónnakhicón sv to be very small                                        
                                                                                    
           hiyo·l hicón n younger son                                               
                                                                                    
           iša·k hicón n man’s personal name                                        
                                                                                    
           kák hicón n small wooded island                                          
                                                                                    
           kakáw hicón n star                                                       
                                                                                    
           mákmakš hicón n smallpox                                                 
                                                                                    
           néš hicón n stick                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           nešpalhicón n buggy                                                      
                                                                                    
           nešpalpál hicón n cypress shingles                                       
                                                                                    
           páyš hicón n hatchet                                                     
                                                                                    
           šokwák hicón n biscuit                                                   
                                                                                    
            šokwáˑk hicón óˑl n cake                                                
                                                                                    
           táy hicón n irrigation ditch                                             
                                                                                    
           tú hicón n canoe                                                         
                                                                                    
           wáŋnan hicón n path                                                      
                                                                                    
           wóš kimáti hicón n ring finger                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          híh tv to plant something (var. of híš)                                   
                                                                                    
          hik iv to come down                                                       
                                                                                    
          hikáˑt n foot; paw                                                        
                                                                                    
           hikáˑt héc n big toe                                                     
                                                                                    
           hikáˑt húy n sole of the foot                                            
                                                                                    
           hiká·t išó·m n little toes                                               
                                                                                    
           hikáˑt cúh n toenail                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         360                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           hikáˑtsim sv to be barefoot                                              
                                                                                    
          hikáwš iv to finish                                                       
                                                                                    
          hikí n west                                                               
                                                                                    
          hikóŋš tv to tie a knot; to fasten                                        
                                                                                    
           icáˑt hikóŋš v to bind an infant’s head                                  
                                                                                    
          hikú n soup; broth                                                        
                                                                                    
          hilám iv to suffer a burning pain                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           tamhéwš hilám n venomous spider                                          
                                                                                    
          hiláŋ n vulture                                                           
                                                                                    
           hiláŋ išóˑl téy n vine of summer grapes                                  
                                                                                    
           hiláŋ šoktéy n a kind of medicinal root                                  
                                                                                    
           hiláŋ teˑ néš n magnolia tree                                            
                                                                                    
           hiláŋ wóˑl n muscadine fruit                                             
                                                                                    
            hiláŋ wóˑl téy n muscadine vine                                         
                                                                                    
          hiláy n wife                                                              
                                                                                    
          hilé·t n aunt                                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           hilé·tta n female cousin                                                 
                                                                                    
          hilíni n web                                                              
                                                                                    
           tamhéwš hilíni n spiderweb                                               
                                                                                    
          hílš tv to sift something                                                 
                                                                                    
           hílšne n sieve                                                           
                                                                                    
            cóhoc hílšne n corn sieve                                               
                                                                                    
          hinó n whirlwind                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         361                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          himáŋ n odor                                                              
                                                                                    
                iv to emit an odor                                                  
                                                                                    
           himáŋtol ití n perfume                                                   
                                                                                    
           kawkáw himáŋ n cologne                                                   
                                                                                    
          himáˑkš tv to mix two things together (pl himáˑmš)                        
                                                                                    
           himáˑmš tv to mix many things together                                   
                                                                                    
           himáˑm tv to gather something; to pile up something                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            himáˑm n a pile                                                         
                                                                                    
            néš himáˑm n a cord of wood                                             
                                                                                    
          himám tv to stab something                                                
                                                                                    
          himatól n four                                                            
                                                                                    
           himatolcíˑk n eight                                                      
                                                                                    
            himatolcíˑkip adv eight times                                           
                                                                                    
           himatólip adv four times                                                 
                                                                                    
           himatólšim n four apiece; four to each                                   
                                                                                    
           skalé himatól n half-dollar                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           wošpé himatól n forty                                                    
                                                                                    
          himóˑš tv to bury someone                                                 
                                                                                    
           himóˑšmák n grave mound                                                  
                                                                                    
           himóˑšne n grave                                                         
                                                                                    
          hín n paddle; oar                                                         
                                                                                    
          hináhi pp beyond                                                          
                                                                                    
           hináhi inó n the far side                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         362                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          hinák iv to be like; to be as if (var. ahinák)                            
                                                                                    
           hinákka adv 1. like; 2. so; 3. ago (var. ahinákka)                       
                                                                                    
          hipá n husband                                                            
                                                                                    
          hipál pp next to                                                          
                                                                                    
          hipóns tv to fold something (var. hipóniš)                                
                                                                                    
           anhipón n rabbit; sheep                                                  
                                                                                    
            anhipón náw n wool                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            anhipón tíl n rabbit skin                                               
                                                                                    
           šokyúlš hipón n book                                                     
                                                                                    
          híš tv to plant something (var. híh)                                      
                                                                                    
           šokhíš n plant                                                           
                                                                                    
          hišáŋ n mother-in-law                                                     
                                                                                    
           hišaŋ šakyól n father-in-law                                             
                                                                                    
          hišiléˑt n younger sister                                                 
                                                                                    
          hišláwš n fever                                                           
                                                                                    
           cošíŋš hišláwš n malaria                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           hišláwš sv to have a fever                                               
                                                                                    
           hišláwš táˑt n yellow fever                                              
                                                                                    
          hitáh iv to come out                                                      
                                                                                    
          hitáwš tv to let something out                                            
                                                                                    
           tó·chitáwš tv to suck something out                                      
                                                                                    
          hitéw iv to like to do                                                    
                                                                                    
           hitéw n someone who prefers to do something                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         363                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            kicá·k ám hitéw n whiskey or brandy drinker                             
                                                                                    
            kóy hitéw n someone who likes to talk                                   
                                                                                    
          hitólš tv to prepare; to arrange                                          
                                                                                    
          hitúlt tv to put something into fire                                      
                                                                                    
           kicóŋškin hitúltne n something to be put into the fire                   
                                                                                    
          hiwálš n dream                                                            
                                                                                    
               sv to dream                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          hiwéw iv to be strong; powerful; holy; hard                               
                                                                                    
           hiwéw n power                                                            
                                                                                    
           áŋhiwéw n church (var. áŋhiwéw inihne)                                   
                                                                                    
           hiwéwka adv much                                                         
                                                                                    
           koyhiwéw n prayer                                                        
                                                                                    
            koyhiwéwáŋ n church                                                     
                                                                                    
            koyhiwéw kóyne n rosary                                                 
                                                                                    
           océh hiwéw n rattlesnake                                                 
                                                                                    
           yíkšhiwéw iv to be expensive                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           yílhiwéw n Sunday; week; holiday                                         
                                                                                    
            inkilíš yilhiwéw héc n Christmas                                        
                                                                                    
            kiwílš yilhiwéw héc n New Year’s Day                                    
                                                                                    
            yilhiwéwéŋ n Mardi Gras                                                 
                                                                                    
            yilhiwéw yíl n Sunday                                                   
                                                                                    
            yilhiwéw pétik yíl n Monday                                             
                                                                                    
          hiwéwš tv to measure something                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         364                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kakáw hiwéwšne n watch; clock                                            
                                                                                    
             kakáw hiwéwšne pác n watch cover                                       
                                                                                    
           hiwéwš n measure; mile; hour                                             
                                                                                    
            né· hiwéwš n mile                                                       
                                                                                    
          hiyáp n right there                                                       
                                                                                    
          hiyékiti n sunrise; Eastern Atakapa people                                
                                                                                    
          hiyén n pig                                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           hiyénáˑl n pork                                                          
                                                                                    
           hiyénéŋ n lard                                                           
                                                                                    
           hiyén išó·l n piglet                                                     
                                                                                    
           hiyén kíš n sow                                                          
                                                                                    
           kákip hiyén n opossum                                                    
                                                                                    
          hiyén n hundred                                                           
                                                                                    
           hiyén pón n one hundred (var. hí·n pón)                                  
                                                                                    
            hiyén pónip adv one hundred times                                       
                                                                                    
              hiyén pón cakóp n one thousand                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               hiyén pón cakópip adv one thousand times                             
                                                                                    
            hiyén pón cíˑk n two hundred                                            
                                                                                    
          hiyóˑl n son                                                              
                                                                                    
           hiyóˑl yúc n elder son                                                   
                                                                                    
           hiyo·l hicón n younger son                                               
                                                                                    
          hokišaˑk n cousins                                                        
                                                                                    
          hokicámš tv to attack someone                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         365                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          hokicóy iv to intersect; to cross                                         
                                                                                    
           hokicóyš iv to be crossed (design)                                       
                                                                                    
          hokinác tv to fight together                                              
                                                                                    
           hokinác iv to fight                                                      
                                                                                    
           hokinác n battle                                                         
                                                                                    
           šakhokinácne n weapons                                                   
                                                                                    
          hoktanúk iv to be different                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          hoktikáw iv to be the same                                                
                                                                                    
          hokwitólip adv at the same time                                           
                                                                                    
          hokwáŋš n war                                                             
                                                                                    
           hokwáŋš iša·k n soldier                                                  
                                                                                    
           hokwáŋš yokón n war song                                                 
                                                                                    
           itiwáŋ hokwáŋš n war chief                                               
                                                                                    
          hokyál iv to marry                                                        
                                                                                    
          hólš n north                                                              
                                                                                    
          hólš tv to put something inside (var inhólš)                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           šoktéy hacehéš hólš tv to bewitch someone                                
                                                                                    
          hom                                                                       
                                                                                    
           óŋ hómhom n prairie chicken Tympanuchus cupido (cf. onomatopoeic sound Kišyuc gave
                                                                                    
            for the bird: om hú hú hú)                                              
                                                                                    
          hóp n hole                                                                
                                                                                    
           icehóp n fontanelle                                                      
                                                                                    
          hoppáy tv to divide something; to share something; to cut up meat (var. hokpáy)
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         366                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           áˑl hoppáy n butcher                                                     
                                                                                    
          hópš sv to be hollow (pl. hopšhópš)                                       
                                                                                    
           hathópš sv to be hollow                                                  
                                                                                    
          hópš tv to pierce something                                               
                                                                                    
           hópšne n awl                                                             
                                                                                    
            néc hópšne n auger                                                      
                                                                                    
            píc hópšne n gimlet                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           wóˑlhópš iškám n big-eye sifting basket (loan translation from Koasati tiłcobá)
                                                                                    
          hú tv to see something                                                    
                                                                                    
           húhu tv to look at something                                             
                                                                                    
           hathú iv to see oneself                                                  
                                                                                    
            hathúne n glass                                                         
                                                                                    
              íˑt hathúne n mirror                                                  
                                                                                    
              pél hathúne n spyglass; telescope                                     
                                                                                    
            tólka hathú iv to take care of oneself; to be careful                   
                                                                                    
          húkin sv to be deep, of a hole.                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          húy pp under                                                              
                                                                                    
           húyhatké n petticoat                                                     
                                                                                    
            šakyólhúyhatké n underwear                                              
                                                                                    
           húy okotkáwš n undershirt                                                
                                                                                    
            húy okotkámš n undershirts                                              
                                                                                    
          húy iv to be under                                                        
                                                                                    
                                          I                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         367                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ic tv to wake someone up                                                  
                                                                                    
           icic tv to wake someone up repeatedly                                    
                                                                                    
          icák n ant                                                                
                                                                                    
           icák iškám n large black ant                                             
                                                                                    
           icákpá n anthill                                                         
                                                                                    
          icáy tv to fry something; to parch something                              
                                                                                    
           kapí icayne n coffee parching pan                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          icé n top of the head                                                     
                                                                                    
             pp above                                                               
                                                                                    
           icehóp n fontanelle                                                      
                                                                                    
          icéš tv to go over something                                              
                                                                                    
           puhicéš tv to jump over something                                        
                                                                                    
          icí adv up                                                                
                                                                                    
          icíht iv to be noon (var. kakáw iciht)                                    
                                                                                    
           icíht katpáhiš n afternoon                                               
                                                                                    
           kakáw icíht iwá·t iv for the sun to rise                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          iciwán iv to be dizzy                                                     
                                                                                    
          íck n chest                                                               
                                                                                    
           icktattá·t n meadowlark (var. šokšó·š icktattá·t)                        
                                                                                    
           ickkawíš n coward                                                        
                                                                                    
          icyúc iv to grow up                                                       
                                                                                    
           icyúciš tv to raise someone                                              
                                                                                    
          ikháwc iv to drown                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         368                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ikháwš tv to drown someone                                                
                                                                                    
          í·kš iv for a single drop to fall                                         
                                                                                    
           í·k n drop                                                               
                                                                                    
           ikíˑk iv to drip                                                         
                                                                                    
            kawkáw ikíˑkne n eaves                                                  
                                                                                    
          ikilíkš v to make something wet (var. akilíkiš)                           
                                                                                    
          ikóm tv to fish for something                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           šakikóm iv to fish                                                       
                                                                                    
          ikunyúc n young person                                                    
                                                                                    
           išaˑk ikunyúc n young man; half-grown boy (15-20 years old)              
                                                                                    
           kíš ikunyúc n girl (var. kiškunyúc; pl. kéšeš ikunyúc)                   
                                                                                    
            kíš ikunyúc wáši n unmarried woman                                      
                                                                                    
          íl sv to be green; to be new; to be raw (pl ilíl)                         
                                                                                    
           itiyílš íl iv to be new moon                                             
                                                                                    
           óŋ il n garter snake                                                     
                                                                                    
           íliš tv to clean something                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ilákš sv to be bored; to be tired of something                            
                                                                                    
          iláŋ iv to mourn; to grieve for (object is in directional case)           
                                                                                    
          ilú n summer; year                                                        
                                                                                    
           ilú tút n spring                                                         
                                                                                    
           ití ilú adv last year                                                    
                                                                                    
          ilú sv to be hot                                                          
                                                                                    
           ilú n heat                                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         369                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           ilúnakilú sv to be very hot                                              
                                                                                    
           ilúš tv to heat something                                                
                                                                                    
          imílš sv to hate someone (pl. imímš)                                      
                                                                                    
          ín iv to ask a question                                                   
                                                                                    
          inác tv to fight someone                                                  
                                                                                    
          ináha deic that far off                                                   
                                                                                    
          ináha adv sort of; somewhat                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kóp ináha sv to be whitish                                               
                                                                                    
           kúc ináha sv to be pink; to be reddish                                   
                                                                                    
           talkóp ináha sv to be bluish                                             
                                                                                    
           úš ináha sv to be gray                                                   
                                                                                    
          ináw iv to enter                                                          
                                                                                    
           ináwš tv to make something enter                                         
                                                                                    
            komók yáw šakináwšne n fishing basket                                   
                                                                                    
          iné n wax myrtle                                                          
                                                                                    
          inék tv to meet someone (var. inúl)                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          inhólš tv to put something inside (var hólš)                              
                                                                                    
          iníh iv to come inside                                                    
                                                                                    
          inkilíš n English, American (<English)                                    
                                                                                    
           inkilíš konán n Irish potato                                             
                                                                                    
           inkilíš táy n English Bayou                                              
                                                                                    
           inkilíš yilhiwéw héc n Christmas                                         
                                                                                    
          inmantáw n name of an Atakapa chief                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         370                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          inó n side                                                                
                                                                                    
           hikí inó n west side                                                     
                                                                                    
           hináhi inó n the far side                                                
                                                                                    
           tólpot inó n the east side                                               
                                                                                    
          inúl tv to meet someone (var. inék)                                       
                                                                                    
           táy hokinúl n fork in a river                                            
                                                                                    
          íŋi tv to look for something                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          íŋš iv to grunt                                                           
                                                                                    
          ipál pp next to                                                           
                                                                                    
          ipán n male cousin (cf. wéˑt ‘female cousin’)                             
                                                                                    
          ipšók n doctor                                                            
                                                                                    
           ipšòk sv to be a doctor                                                  
                                                                                    
           ipšók tv to doctor someone                                               
                                                                                    
           kiwilš ipšók n western doctor                                            
                                                                                    
          ipúc adv only                                                             
                                                                                    
          íš iv to rot; to stink                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            sv to be rotten (pl íšiš)                                               
                                                                                    
           cóhocíš n proper name of a chief living on Lake Prien                    
                                                                                    
          išáˑk n person; occasionally ‘man’                                        
                                                                                    
           išáˑk hicón n man’s personal name                                        
                                                                                    
           išaˑk káw n dead person; white person (var. ša·kkáw) (pl. išaˑk šappíhk) 
                                                                                    
           išáˑk kúc n Indian (pl. išaˑk kúckuc)                                    
                                                                                    
           iša·kšakkóŋne n sheriff                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         371                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           išá·k wáŋ n traveler                                                     
                                                                                    
           išáˑk wáši n old man (pl išáˑk wašwáši)                                  
                                                                                    
           yukhíti išá·k n the Atakapa people                                       
                                                                                    
          išák sv to be born (of humans)                                            
                                                                                    
          išáˑt n head                                                              
                                                                                    
           išá·t hál n back of the head                                             
                                                                                    
           išaˑthatyíncne n crown                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           išáˑt láˑš n scalp                                                       
                                                                                    
           išáˑtsim iv to be bare-headed                                            
                                                                                    
          iših v to cross over                                                      
                                                                                    
          išiwéˑt n elder sister                                                    
                                                                                    
          iškalít n child                                                           
                                                                                    
           kíš iškalít n girl (var. kišškalít)                                      
                                                                                    
           šakyól iškalít n boy (var. šakyólškalít)                                 
                                                                                    
          iškám sv to be broad; thick                                               
                                                                                    
           háw iškám n sleet                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           okyúl iškám n shawl                                                      
                                                                                    
           óc iškám n molar tooth                                                   
                                                                                    
           wáš iškám n cabbage                                                      
                                                                                    
            wáš iškám wíˑl n turnip                                                 
                                                                                    
           wóˑlhópš iškám n big-eye sifting basket (loan translation from Koasati tiłcobá)
                                                                                    
          iskánta n man’s personal name                                             
                                                                                    
          iškišéˑt n man’s sister                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         372                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          iškišíl n daughter                                                        
                                                                                    
          išn̥ céˑt n woman’s (?) brother (cf. n̥ céˑt)                             
                                                                                    
           išn̥ céˑt hicón n younger brother                                        
                                                                                    
           išn̥ céˑt hiláy n sister-in-law                                          
                                                                                    
          išóˑl n nail                                                              
                                                                                    
           kocnán išóˑl n iron nail                                                 
                                                                                    
           kocnán táˑt išóˑl n brass nail                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           néš išóˑl n wooden nail                                                  
                                                                                    
          išóˑl n young, of animals;                                                
                                                                                    
              iv to be small, animate (sg)                                          
                                                                                    
              tv to give birth to a single offspring (animals)                      
                                                                                    
           išó·m iv to be small, animate (pl)                                       
                                                                                    
            cílack išó·m n seed ticks                                               
                                                                                    
            hiká·t išó·m n little toes                                              
                                                                                    
            nohámš išó·m n chicks                                                   
                                                                                    
           išóˑmš tv to give birth to a many offspring (animals)                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           hiláŋ išóˑl téy n grape vine                                             
                                                                                    
           šiwón išóˑl n kitten                                                     
                                                                                    
           šúl išóˑl n puppy                                                        
                                                                                    
           táy išóˑl n brook                                                        
                                                                                    
           wóšišóˑl n little finger                                                 
                                                                                    
            wóšišóˑlháˑn n nine                                                     
                                                                                    
              wóšišóˑlháˑnip adv nine times                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         373                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          išpác iv for sleet to form                                                
                                                                                    
          išpál n piece of pottery; jar; pot; plate (var šihtpál)                   
                                                                                    
           išpál máŋ n dish                                                         
                                                                                    
          išteméˑt n hat                                                            
                                                                                    
           išteméˑt máŋ n bonnet                                                    
                                                                                    
          ištóhš n mulatto (?)                                                      
                                                                                    
          išúl tv. to catch something (singular object)                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           išáw tv to catch something (plural object)                               
                                                                                    
          íˑt n face; first                                                         
                                                                                    
           íˑt haccákšne n towel                                                    
                                                                                    
           íˑt hathúne n mirror                                                     
                                                                                    
           íˑt hatkópišne n white face-paint                                        
                                                                                    
           i·twáŋ v to lead                                                         
                                                                                    
           óc íˑtkin n front teeth                                                  
                                                                                    
          ít n dung                                                                 
                                                                                    
          itáŋ n place; where?                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           itáŋ moˑn n everywhere                                                   
                                                                                    
           itáŋike n from where?                                                    
                                                                                    
          itáns n cloud; sky                                                        
                                                                                    
           itáns iv to be cloudy                                                    
                                                                                    
          itéw iv to ride; to sit on (cf. itókiš)                                   
                                                                                    
           šakitéwkáwine n chair (varr. šakitéwkáhune; šakitéwkáne)                 
                                                                                    
          itéˑt n father                                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         374                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           itéˑtpél n stepfather                                                    
                                                                                    
          íti n front; first                                                        
                                                                                    
           itiwáŋ iv to govern; act as chief                                        
                                                                                    
            itiwáŋ hokwáŋš n war chief                                              
                                                                                    
          íti pp in front of; on this side of                                       
                                                                                    
           ítikómš iv to hang something in front                                    
                                                                                    
            hatítikómš n apron                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           ítiwáŋ iv to govern; to act as a chief                                   
                                                                                    
           šokíti n headman                                                         
                                                                                    
           íti adv more                                                             
                                                                                    
           íti adj last                                                             
                                                                                    
            íti ilú adv last year                                                   
                                                                                    
            íti itiyílš adv last month                                              
                                                                                    
             íti itiyílš hál n last month of the year                               
                                                                                    
            íti tém adv day before yesterday                                        
                                                                                    
          íti sv to be first in line                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ití n night                                                               
                                                                                    
           ití adv last night                                                       
                                                                                    
           á ití adv tonight                                                        
                                                                                    
           ití kimát n midnight                                                     
                                                                                    
           ití máŋ adv all night                                                    
                                                                                    
            ití máŋ moˑn adv all night long                                         
                                                                                    
            himáŋtol ití n perfume                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         375                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           itiyílš n moon; month                                                    
                                                                                    
            hál itiyílš adv next month                                              
                                                                                    
            itiyílš íl iv to be new moon                                            
                                                                                    
            itiyílš péh iv to be half moon                                          
                                                                                    
            itiyílš púk iv to be full moon                                          
                                                                                    
          ití iv to be dark                                                         
                                                                                    
           itínakití iv to be very dark                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          itókiš tv to ride something (cf. itéw)                                    
                                                                                    
          itólš tv to arrange something; to put something in order                  
                                                                                    
          itúl tv to put something; to place something                              
                                                                                    
           šakitúlyahne n table (var. šakitúlyahnan)                                
                                                                                    
          iwál n shell, open (cf. úk)                                               
                                                                                    
          iwáŋš iv to shake; to wiggle (var. iwáŋiš)                                
                                                                                    
           néˑiwáŋš n earthquake                                                    
                                                                                    
          iwá·t iv to move hither                                                   
                                                                                    
           kakáw icíht iwá·t iv for the sun to rise                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           óˑl iwá·t iv to move nearer                                              
                                                                                    
          iwéw iv to be a copy                                                      
                                                                                    
           iwéwš tv to imitate someone; to make fun of someone                      
                                                                                    
           iwewyúlš iv to make a life-like drawing                                  
                                                                                    
            iwéw šakyúlš n portrait                                                 
                                                                                    
          iwíl tv to put something in order                                         
                                                                                    
          íwš sv to be angry                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         376                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          iyáŋ n there                                                              
                                                                                    
          iyàšk tv to dampen something                                              
                                                                                    
          iyáw tv to lift something; to hoist something                             
                                                                                    
           kóŋiyáw tv to pick something up                                          
                                                                                    
           okiyáw n flag                                                            
                                                                                    
          iyé iv to be more                                                         
                                                                                    
          iyéc iv to rise, of the sun                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           iyécne n sunrise                                                         
                                                                                    
                                          K                                         
                                                                                    
          ká tv to do something; to make something; to cause someone to do something
                                                                                    
           ká adj made                                                              
                                                                                    
           kán ger doing; making                                                    
                                                                                    
           káne ger what must be made or done                                       
                                                                                    
           hehhatká iv to hurt oneself                                              
                                                                                    
           šokká iv to work                                                         
                                                                                    
           tolká tv to cure someone                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ká·ce sv to be ugly (pl kacká·ce)                                         
                                                                                    
          kackác sv to be polished; smooth                                          
                                                                                    
           náw kackác n slippers                                                    
                                                                                    
           kackáciš tv to plane something                                           
                                                                                    
            néš kackácišne n plane                                                  
                                                                                    
          káhune n seat                                                             
                                                                                    
          ká·k n crow; raven                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         377                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kák n forest                                                              
                                                                                    
           kák hicóm n woody island                                                 
                                                                                    
           kákip hiyén n opossum                                                    
                                                                                    
          kakáw n sun                                                               
                                                                                    
           kakáw hicón n star                                                       
                                                                                    
           kakáw hiwéwšne n watch; clock                                            
                                                                                    
             kakáw hiwéwšne pác n watch cover                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kakók n fence                                                             
                                                                                    
           kakók áŋkat n gate                                                       
                                                                                    
           kakók tím n picket fence; yard; garden (loan translation from Koasati holihtá caká:wa)
                                                                                    
           neštámš kakók n rail fence; board fence                                  
                                                                                    
           neštámš ní·t kakók n five-rail fence                                     
                                                                                    
           téłk kakók tímkin n rose                                                 
                                                                                    
          kál n cane mat                                                            
                                                                                    
          kálnáw n man’s personal name                                              
                                                                                    
          kamcíš n dragonfly                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kamkámš iv to stick out; to spread out                                    
                                                                                    
           kamkám  adj sticking out                                                 
                                                                                    
           nokkám n shark                                                           
                                                                                    
           téw kamkám n tail fins                                                   
                                                                                    
          kámš tv to scratch something; to scrape something                         
                                                                                    
          kán n home                                                                
                                                                                    
          kán iv to roar, of thunder                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         378                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kán ger doing; making                                                     
                                                                                    
          kanán n turtle                                                            
                                                                                    
           kanán iká·t n turtle’s flippers                                          
                                                                                    
           kanán tál n turtleshell                                                  
                                                                                    
          kancáw n hoe                                                              
                                                                                    
          kaŋšínkš n live oak                                                       
                                                                                    
           kaŋšínkš néš n live oak tree                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          káp tv to put something                                                   
                                                                                    
          kapí n coffee < French café                                               
                                                                                    
           kapí icáyne n coffee parching pan                                        
                                                                                    
           kapi líline n coffee grinder                                             
                                                                                    
           kapí óc n coffee grounds                                                 
                                                                                    
          kapó n cup ( < English)                                                   
                                                                                    
          káš iv to be deep, of water; to be high tide                              
                                                                                    
           túl káš iv for the tide to be high                                       
                                                                                    
          kát n mouth                                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           cít kátke n chew of tobacco                                              
                                                                                    
           katkéš n bridle                                                          
                                                                                    
            katkéš óˑ n rope of horsehair made into a bridle                        
                                                                                    
            kocnán katkéš n iron bridle                                             
                                                                                    
           katnáw n beard; moustache                                                
                                                                                    
            kátnaw hatlášne n razor                                                 
                                                                                    
           kattó·c tv to kiss something                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         379                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            kattó·c n a kiss                                                        
                                                                                    
           katúc n beak of a bird                                                   
                                                                                    
           kócnan katkéš n bridle                                                   
                                                                                    
           pé·m kaccí·k n double-barreled gun                                       
                                                                                    
          kathópš n waterlily                                                       
                                                                                    
          kátkoš n eagle                                                            
                                                                                    
           kátkošyók n man’s personal name (‘Singing Eagle”)                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            kátkošyók táy n Calcasieu River                                         
                                                                                    
          kató n lip                                                                
                                                                                    
           katókock n harelip                                                       
                                                                                    
           kató né n lower lip                                                      
                                                                                    
           kató óci n upper lip                                                     
                                                                                    
          katpák n trout (pl. katpá)                                                
                                                                                    
          katpíš n person with a twisted lip                                        
                                                                                    
          káw sv to die (sg) (pl. píhk)                                             
                                                                                    
              iv to be dead                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           ickkawíš n coward                                                        
                                                                                    
           kawkáw káw sv to be thirsty                                              
                                                                                    
           kicá·k káw sv to be drunk (pl. kicá·k píhk) (var. kicá·k amkáw)          
                                                                                    
           ó·l káw sv to be hungry                                                  
                                                                                    
           šakkáw n white person, archaic (pl šappíhk)                              
                                                                                    
            šakkáw kóy úhc n person who can speak the language of the white people  
                                                                                    
          *káw tv to put something in                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         380                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           káwnan n sack; bag; sheath; case (var. káwne)                            
                                                                                    
           ne·šišk káwne n salt-cellar                                              
                                                                                    
           šakitéwkáwine n chair (varr. šakitéwkáwne; šakitéwkáne)                  
                                                                                    
           tikšakkáwne n quiver                                                     
                                                                                    
           *káwš tv to cause to put something in (sg. obj)                          
                                                                                    
            hátkanan káwš n pillowcase (var. hátkane káwšne)                        
                                                                                    
            hatuckáwšne n veil over the face at birth; caul                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            húy okotkáwš n undershirt                                               
                                                                                    
            káwš n cork                                                             
                                                                                    
            okotkáwš n shirt (pl okotkámš)                                          
                                                                                    
              okotkáwšmáŋ n coat                                                    
                                                                                    
               okotkáwšmáŋ hópš n coat buttonhole                                   
                                                                                    
               okotkáwšmáŋ nók n coat sleeve                                        
                                                                                    
              okotkáwšmók n waistcoat                                               
                                                                                    
              okotkáwš n̥ té šúk n shirt collar                                     
                                                                                    
            wóˑškáwš n thimble                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            *kámš tv to cause to put something in (pl object)                       
                                                                                    
              okotkámš n shirts (sg okotkáwš)                                       
                                                                                    
              húy okotkámš n undershirts (sg. húy okotkáwš)                         
                                                                                    
          káw iv to fly                                                             
                                                                                    
           káwca·t iv to fly quickly                                                
                                                                                    
          kawkáw n water                                                            
                                                                                    
           kawkáw ámne n drinking water                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         381                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kawkáw hé n seawater                                                     
                                                                                    
           kawkáw himáŋ n cologne                                                   
                                                                                    
           kawkáw ikíˑkne n eaves                                                   
                                                                                    
           kawkáw ikí·kšne n gutter; ditch                                          
                                                                                    
           kawkáw káš iv to be high tide; to be high water                          
                                                                                    
           kawkáw káw sv to be thirsty                                              
                                                                                    
           kawkáw kúc n red wine; claret                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kawkáw náwne n rainwater tub                                             
                                                                                    
           kawkáw onpác n vinegar; root beer                                        
                                                                                    
           kawkáw óceh n water snake                                                
                                                                                    
           kawkáw tehóp n well                                                      
                                                                                    
          kawkáw iv to rain                                                         
                                                                                    
          káwš tv to comb something                                                 
                                                                                    
            káwšne n comb                                                           
                                                                                    
          káwš n handle                                                             
                                                                                    
          káy conj and then                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          káyš tv to mend something                                                 
                                                                                    
          ké sv to have something (neg. háhš)                                       
                                                                                    
           cík katké n a chew of tobacco                                            
                                                                                    
           kéˑtne n having (var. kéne)                                              
                                                                                    
          kéc n liver                                                               
                                                                                    
          kelakwác n bottle                                                         
                                                                                    
          kelé·t n aunt                                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         382                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kémš iv to row                                                            
                                                                                    
           tú kémšne n rowboat                                                      
                                                                                    
          *ké·š tv to put something in a container                                  
                                                                                    
           komhópškin hatké·š tv to put something in one’s pocket                   
                                                                                    
          ké·t iv to sit; to remain; to stay; to dwell (sg) (pl. núl)               
                                                                                    
           nuŋké·t iv to live in a village (sg) (pl. nuŋnúl)                        
                                                                                    
           tuké·t iv to sit in a boat                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           yóˑckéˑt iv to squat                                                     
                                                                                    
          kéš tv to put something in                                                
                                                                                    
           katkéš n bridle                                                          
                                                                                    
            kocnán katkéš n iron bridle                                             
                                                                                    
           šakyúlš kéš iv to post a letter                                          
                                                                                    
          kicáˑk n whiskey; alcoholic beverage                                      
                                                                                    
           kicá·k ám hitéw n whiskey or brandy drinker                              
                                                                                    
           kicáˑk hé n lager beer                                                   
                                                                                    
           kicá·k káw sv to be drunk (sg) (var. kicá·k amkáw)                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kicá·k píhk sv to be drunk (pl)                                          
                                                                                    
          kicáw n cleared, settled, said of muddied water                           
                                                                                    
           kiškicáw n woman’s proper name                                           
                                                                                    
          kicóŋš n fire; coals; gunpowder                                           
                                                                                    
           kicóŋš hipál n fireplace; hearth                                         
                                                                                    
           kicóŋš híšne n poker                                                     
                                                                                    
           kicóŋškin hitúltne n something to be put into the fire                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         383                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kihipáhš n horizontal design                                              
                                                                                    
           yúl kihipáhšot adv striped horizontally                                  
                                                                                    
          kíka intj look! see! behold!                                              
                                                                                    
          kilétkíš n proper name of a woman                                         
                                                                                    
          kimá·t n beans; peas                                                      
                                                                                    
           kimá·t tál n pod of beans or peas                                        
                                                                                    
          kimát n middle                                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           wóš kimát n palm of the hand                                             
                                                                                    
           kimáti pp in the middle of                                               
                                                                                    
            wóš kimáti n middle finger                                              
                                                                                    
              wóš kimáti hicón n ring finger                                        
                                                                                    
            wó·l kimáti n eyeball                                                   
                                                                                    
          kimíŋ iv to breathe                                                       
                                                                                    
           kimíŋne n windpipe                                                       
                                                                                    
          kinál adv astride                                                         
                                                                                    
          kiné iv to be next                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kíni tv to whet something                                                 
                                                                                    
           kocnán kíninan n whetstone                                               
                                                                                    
          kíŋ n pet (pl šakkíŋ)                                                     
                                                                                    
           kíŋ iv to be a pet                                                       
                                                                                    
          kíŋhiš tv to iron something                                               
                                                                                    
          kíŋš tv to saw something                                                  
                                                                                    
           néškíŋšne n saw                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         384                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           neškiŋštámšáŋ n sawmill                                                  
                                                                                    
          kipáhši pp across (var. kipáhšip)                                         
                                                                                    
           hatkipáhši iv to be sidesaddle                                           
                                                                                    
          kipáco n gourd                                                            
                                                                                    
           kipáco šoŋšóŋiš n gourd rattle                                           
                                                                                    
          kíš n woman; female (pl. kéš)                                             
                                                                                    
           canúk kíš n mare                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kiletkíš n woman’s proper name, mother of Tottokš                        
                                                                                    
           kíš céˑŋ n a proud woman (pl kíš céŋceˑŋ)                                
                                                                                    
           kíš ikunyúc n girl (pl kešéš) (varr. kíškunyúc; kíš iškalít)             
                                                                                    
            kíš ikunyúc wáši n unmarried woman                                      
                                                                                    
           kiškicáw n woman’s proper name; daughter of Kišyuc                       
                                                                                    
           kiškóp n old woman (pl keškopkóp)                                        
                                                                                    
           kišmók n woman’s proper name, Ponponne, mother of Kišyuc                 
                                                                                    
           kištóˑt n woman’s proper name, deceased daughter of Kišyuc               
                                                                                    
           kišyón n witch                                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kišyúc n will-o’-the-wisp; woman’s proper name; Louison Huntington       
                                                                                    
           nohàmš kíš n hen                                                         
                                                                                    
           táykópkíš n woman’s proper name                                          
                                                                                    
          kišáŋ n lid, of the eye                                                   
                                                                                    
           wóˑl kišáŋ n eyelid; eyelash                                             
                                                                                    
            wóˑl kišáŋ né n lower eyelid                                            
                                                                                    
            wóˑl kišáŋ óci n upper eyelid                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         385                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kitúš iv to spit                                                          
                                                                                    
           kitúš n spittle                                                          
                                                                                    
          kíwilš n French person; white person; boss; master, of a slave < French créole (?)
                                                                                    
           kiwílš iv to be a master; to be a Frenchman; to be a white person        
                                                                                    
           kíwilš ipšók n western-style doctor                                      
                                                                                    
            kíwilš ipšók iv to be a western-style doctor                            
                                                                                    
           kíwilš ké n slave                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kíwilš kóy n French language                                             
                                                                                    
           kíwilš núŋ n Lafayette, Louisiana                                        
                                                                                    
           kíwilš óˑl n apple                                                       
                                                                                    
          kó n basket for holding infant, worn on the back                          
                                                                                    
          kóc tv to cut something                                                   
                                                                                    
           kockóc tv to cut something repeatedly                                    
                                                                                    
           kóciš tv to cut a piece off something                                    
                                                                                    
           kocpákiš tv to cut something down                                        
                                                                                    
           katókock n harelip                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           šokkóc n tailor                                                          
                                                                                    
          kocitóliš sv to be checkered; to have squares                             
                                                                                    
          kocnán n knife; iron; metal                                               
                                                                                    
           kocnán išóˑl n iron nail                                                 
                                                                                    
           kocnán ká n scissors                                                     
                                                                                    
           kocnán katkéš n iron bridle                                              
                                                                                    
           kocnán kíninan n whetstone                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         386                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kocnán šiht n iron kettle                                                
                                                                                    
           kocnán tá·t n copper; brass                                              
                                                                                    
            kocnán táˑt išóˑl n brass nail                                          
                                                                                    
           kocnán tikišáˑt n iron arrowhead                                         
                                                                                    
           kocnán úc n point of a knife                                             
                                                                                    
          kócti n left side                                                         
                                                                                    
          koctólš sv to be round                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kóh sv to want (var kóhš)                                                 
                                                                                    
          kóhic iv to set, of the sun; to sink                                      
                                                                                    
           taŋkóhi iv to jump in                                                    
                                                                                    
          kók sv to be bent; to be crooked (pl. kókkok)                             
                                                                                    
           kókiš tv to bend something (var. kók)                                    
                                                                                    
            hatkókiš tv to bend an elbow, knee, or other body part                  
                                                                                    
            kokkókiš n hook                                                         
                                                                                    
              kokkókiš óˑ n fishing line                                            
                                                                                    
          kókiš tv to take something from someone                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kolkól iv to be wavy; undulating                                          
                                                                                    
          koli                                                                      
                                                                                    
           kolláwi n match (varr. koliláwi; koliláwine)                             
                                                                                    
            teyòh koliláwine n match box                                            
                                                                                    
          kólli n small bells                                                       
                                                                                    
          kólš tv to stuff something                                                
                                                                                    
           kuyyatkól n sausage                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         387                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kóm n belly                                                               
                                                                                    
           komhéš n colic; diarrhea                                                 
                                                                                    
           kóm kamkám n belly fins                                                  
                                                                                    
           túc komá·l n calf of leg                                                 
                                                                                    
          kóm tv to hang something or someone (var. kómš)                           
                                                                                    
          komhópš n pocket                                                          
                                                                                    
           komhópškin hatké·š to put something in one’s pocket                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kómi sv to be thick; to be stout (pl komkómi)                             
                                                                                    
           háwkómi iv to snow heavily                                               
                                                                                    
          komnáw tv to hang something up                                            
                                                                                    
          kómok n basket                                                            
                                                                                    
           kómok yáw šakináwšne n fishing basket (var. kómok yáw šakkáwne)          
                                                                                    
          kómš tv to hang something (var. kóm)                                      
                                                                                    
           ánhatkómš n earring                                                      
                                                                                    
           hatítikómš n apron                                                       
                                                                                    
           úckin hatkómš n nose ring                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           wó·š hatkómš n glove                                                     
                                                                                    
          kó·n n garfish                                                            
                                                                                    
          kó·naš n man’s personal name                                              
                                                                                    
          kónan n potato                                                            
                                                                                    
           inkilíš kónan n Irish potato                                             
                                                                                    
           kónan áyip n duck potato (var. áyip kónan) (Sagittaria lancifolia)       
                                                                                    
           kónan ó·l n sweet potato (pl kónan oló·l)                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         388                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           yukhíti kónan n duck potato (Sagittaria lancifolia)                      
                                                                                    
          kó·ŋ sv to be heavy                                                       
                                                                                    
           kó·ŋnakkó·ŋ sv to be very heavy                                          
                                                                                    
           kó·ŋnéš n hackberry tree                                                 
                                                                                    
          kóŋ tv to seize someone (sg); to arrest someone (sg); to take something (sg) (pl. yál)
                                                                                    
           iša·kšakkóŋne n sheriff                                                  
                                                                                    
           kóŋiyáw tv to pick something up                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kóŋtém tv to tear something (sg) (pl. kóŋtemtém)                         
                                                                                    
           koŋpáhiš tv to pull something out                                        
                                                                                    
           kóŋpáy tv to turn something over                                         
                                                                                    
           loŋlóŋš kóŋne n lightning rod                                            
                                                                                    
           šakyúlš kóŋ sv to receive a letter                                       
                                                                                    
          kóŋ tv for the thunderer to strike something (i.e. lightning)             
                                                                                    
           lóŋloŋš kóŋ tv for lightning to strike something (lit. the thunderer)    
                                                                                    
          kóp sv to be white (pl. kópkop; kókkop)                                   
                                                                                    
           áŋ šakkópišne n whitewash                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           hatkópiš iv to paint oneself white                                       
                                                                                    
           íˑt hatkópišne n white face-paint                                        
                                                                                    
           kiškóp n old woman (pl keškopkóp)                                        
                                                                                    
           kóp ináha sv to be whitish                                               
                                                                                    
           kópnakkóp sv to be very white                                            
                                                                                    
           kú kóp n egg white                                                       
                                                                                    
           náw kókkop n stockings                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         389                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            náw kókkop hatkáyišne n garters                                         
                                                                                    
            náw kókkop yúlyul n striped stockings                                   
                                                                                    
           nolkóp n man’s personal name                                             
                                                                                    
           talkopkóp sv to be light blue                                            
                                                                                    
           táykópkíš n woman’s proper name                                          
                                                                                    
           ta·tkóp sv to be light yellow                                            
                                                                                    
          kóš n bay in the sea; bend in a river                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kóškoš tv to bother someone                                               
                                                                                    
          kóy n word; speech; language; throat                                      
                                                                                    
           kíwilš kóy n French language                                             
                                                                                    
           kóy haceméš n slander                                                    
                                                                                    
           koyhiwéw n prayer                                                        
                                                                                    
            koyhiwéwáŋ n church                                                     
                                                                                    
            koyhiwéw kóyne n rosary                                                 
                                                                                    
           kóymak n Adam’s apple                                                    
                                                                                    
           yukhíti kóy n the Atakapa language                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kóy iv to speak; to crow                                                  
                                                                                    
           kóy hatwiškáhš sv to talk too much                                       
                                                                                    
           tockoyhéw n mockingbird                                                  
                                                                                    
          koyhópš sv to cough                                                       
                                                                                    
          kóyka n tuberculosis                                                      
                                                                                    
          koyíw n cold (disease)                                                    
                                                                                    
           koyíw šakyóŋš n whooping cough                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         390                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kú n egg                                                                  
                                                                                    
           kú kóp n egg white                                                       
                                                                                    
           kú tál n eggshell                                                        
                                                                                    
           kú tá·t n egg yolk                                                       
                                                                                    
           nohámš kú n chicken’s egg                                                
                                                                                    
          kú iv to lay an egg                                                       
                                                                                    
          kúc sv to be red (pl. kúckuc)                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           hatkúciš iv to paint oneself red                                         
                                                                                    
            óˑkš áˑl hatkúcišne n rouge                                             
                                                                                    
           iša·k kúc n Indian (pl. iša·k kúckuc)                                    
                                                                                    
           kawkáw kúc n red wine; claret                                            
                                                                                    
           kúc ináha sv to be pink; to be reddish                                   
                                                                                    
           kúcka adv redly                                                          
                                                                                    
           kúcnakkúc sv to be dark red                                              
                                                                                    
           láklakš kúc n gold; copper                                               
                                                                                    
           néš kúc n red oak                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           n̥ hóhkuc n vermillion                                                   
                                                                                    
           šó kúckuc n red pepper                                                   
                                                                                    
           táy kúc n Red River                                                      
                                                                                    
          kucná·k n hip                                                             
                                                                                    
          kúl adv already                                                           
                                                                                    
           kúliš adv again; a second time                                           
                                                                                    
           kúlke adv always                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         391                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kúlš tv to swallow something                                              
                                                                                    
          kúlš n grandson (form uncertain)                                          
                                                                                    
          kulšá n grandfather                                                       
                                                                                    
          kulšwálš n peanuts                                                        
                                                                                    
          kultán adv long ago                                                       
                                                                                    
          kúmpo n okra (< French gumbo)                                             
                                                                                    
          kušmé·l n black person (pl kušmelmé·l)                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kušmé·l tikáw n monkey (pl. kušmé·l šaktikáw)                            
                                                                                    
          kúšnak n hip; side; flanks                                                
                                                                                    
           kúšnak šakƛópšne n spurs                                                 
                                                                                    
          kúy n intestines                                                          
                                                                                    
           kuyyatkól n sausage                                                      
                                                                                    
          kúy n prickly-pear cactus                                                 
                                                                                    
           kúy [táy] n Bayou des Gayes (now Bayou Guy)                              
                                                                                    
                                          L                                         
                                                                                    
          laccíˑk n six [< lá·t + cíˑk]                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           laccíˑkip n six times                                                    
                                                                                    
           laccíˑksim iv to be six apiece; six to each                              
                                                                                    
           wošpé laccíˑk n sixty                                                    
                                                                                    
          lá·k sv to be strong; be hard; be quick (pl lákla·k)                      
                                                                                    
           áŋlá·k n jail                                                            
                                                                                    
            áŋla·kyáw n jailor; sheriff                                             
                                                                                    
           hí lá·k n hurricane                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         392                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           *la·ki tv to strain something                                            
                                                                                    
             hatlá·ki iv to strain oneself                                          
                                                                                    
           lá·kiš tv to bar something; to lock something                            
                                                                                    
            áŋlá·kišne n lock; key                                                  
                                                                                    
           yáwlákla·k n gaspergou fish; drum fish                                   
                                                                                    
          lá·kš iv to be ripe, of corn                                              
                                                                                    
          lák n sun                                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           téłk lák n sunflower (loan translation from English)                     
                                                                                    
           láklakš kóp n silver                                                     
                                                                                    
           láklakš kúc n gold; copper                                               
                                                                                    
           láklakš tá·t n gold color                                                
                                                                                    
           tanstál láklakš n paper money                                            
                                                                                    
          lamlámš iv to be dazzling; to be shiny                                    
                                                                                    
          láns n deer                                                               
                                                                                    
           láns á·l n deer meat                                                     
                                                                                    
           láns tíl n buckskin                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          láš tv to skin something; to shave something                              
                                                                                    
           hatláš iv to shave                                                       
                                                                                    
            katnáw hatlášne n razor                                                 
                                                                                    
          lá·t n three                                                              
                                                                                    
           lá·tip adv three times                                                   
                                                                                    
           lá·tsim iv to be three apiece; three to each                             
                                                                                    
           wošpé hál lá·t n thirteen                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         393                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           wošpé lá·t n thirty                                                      
                                                                                    
          láw iv to burn                                                            
                                                                                    
          láwi tv to burn something                                                 
                                                                                    
           kolláwi n match (varr. koliláwi; koliláwine)                             
                                                                                    
            teyòh koliláwine n match box                                            
                                                                                    
           néš láwine n firewood                                                    
                                                                                    
          léˑmš sv to love someone                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          léˑt n sister                                                             
                                                                                    
           léˑtta n female cousin                                                   
                                                                                    
          líkš tv to crush something by hand                                        
                                                                                    
          líkš iv to be worn out                                                    
                                                                                    
          líl sv to be soft (pl. líllil)                                            
                                                                                    
           líllaklíl sv to be very soft                                             
                                                                                    
           náw líl n down feathers                                                  
                                                                                    
           šokatkéŋiš líl n strawberry                                              
                                                                                    
           líli tv to soften something; to grind something                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            cóhoc líline n corn mill                                                
                                                                                    
            kapí líline n coffee grinder                                            
                                                                                    
            neškoltú líline n sugar press                                           
                                                                                    
          líla n chinaberry (< French lilas des Antilles)                           
                                                                                    
           líla néš chinaberry tree                                                 
                                                                                    
          ló n name of the village on the west side of Lake Prien                   
                                                                                    
          ló n man’s personal name                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         394                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          lóhi tv to help someone (varr. lóhiš, lóˑš)                               
                                                                                    
           lóˑš tv to help someone                                                  
                                                                                    
            lóˑš n help                                                             
                                                                                    
          lók n prairie                                                             
                                                                                    
          lómš tv to peel something                                                 
                                                                                    
          lóˑn iv to hum; to roar                                                   
                                                                                    
          lóŋloŋš n thunder                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           lóŋloŋš kóŋ tv for lightning to strike something (lit. the thunderer)    
                                                                                    
           loŋlóŋš kóŋne n lightning rod                                            
                                                                                    
           lóŋloŋš iv to thunder                                                    
                                                                                    
          lú n mud; dirt                                                            
                                                                                    
           lúik ka ámšne n pottery cup                                              
                                                                                    
           lúšim iv to be nothing but mud or dirt                                   
                                                                                    
          lúl v to swim                                                             
                                                                                    
           lúl išíšt v to swim across something                                     
                                                                                    
          lumlúmiš tv to roll something                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           lumlúmš iv to turn                                                       
                                                                                    
           lumlúmiš n wheel                                                         
                                                                                    
            néšpál lumlúmiš n wheel on a vehicle                                    
                                                                                    
          lúš n scale, of a fish (pl. šaklúš)                                       
                                                                                    
          lúš sv to be sticky (pl. lulúš)                                           
                                                                                    
                                         M                                          
                                                                                    
          má intj where is?                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         395                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          máciwa n fly                                                              
                                                                                    
          má·k n forehead                                                           
                                                                                    
          mák n lump; bump; knot; mound                                             
                                                                                    
           himóˑšmák n grave mound                                                  
                                                                                    
           kóymak n Adam’s apple                                                    
                                                                                    
           neˑmák n mountain                                                        
                                                                                    
           néš mák n knot in wood                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           wóˑš mák n fist                                                          
                                                                                    
          makáw sv to fall(sg); to give birth, of quadrupeds (pl wiló)              
                                                                                    
          mákeˑc n lizard                                                           
                                                                                    
          maké tv to exchange something; to barter something; to swap something     
                                                                                    
          mákmakš n skin eruption                                                   
                                                                                    
           mákmakš hicón n smallpox                                                 
                                                                                    
          mákpel n palmetto                                                         
                                                                                    
           mákpel áŋ n palmetto house                                               
                                                                                    
          mákš iv to dive                                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           ikumákš iv to dive into water                                            
                                                                                    
          mál n upper leg; thigh                                                    
                                                                                    
          máŋ sv to be long (pl. máŋmaŋ)                                            
                                                                                    
           ákitoš nalmáŋmaŋ n spring frog                                           
                                                                                    
           ánmaŋmaŋ n mule                                                          
                                                                                    
           hatnáka máŋ adv how long?                                                
                                                                                    
           náhc máŋ n yellow-bellied slider a turtle species                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         396                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           náw máŋmaŋ n boots                                                       
                                                                                    
           néš tewáš máŋmaŋ n magnolia                                              
                                                                                    
           okotkáwšmáŋ n coat                                                       
                                                                                    
            okotkáwšmáŋ hópš n coat buttonhole                                      
                                                                                    
            okotkáwšmáŋ nók n coat sleeve                                           
                                                                                    
           tehóp máŋ n tube                                                         
                                                                                    
           té·š máŋmaŋ sv to wear the hair long                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           yúl máŋš n line (pl yúl máŋmaŋš)                                         
                                                                                    
           máŋiš tv to make something long                                          
                                                                                    
          máŋ adv long time                                                         
                                                                                    
           ití máŋ adv all night                                                    
                                                                                    
            ití máŋ moˑn adv all night long                                         
                                                                                    
           máŋháhštán adv before long                                               
                                                                                    
           máŋháˑn adv quickly (in time)                                            
                                                                                    
          máŋot adv always                                                          
                                                                                    
          máy adv away                                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          maynóy pp on the other side of                                            
                                                                                    
          méˑc sv to be tall (pl mécmeˑc)                                           
                                                                                    
          méˑl sv to be black (pl mélmeˑl)                                          
                                                                                    
           šokómmé·l n buffalo (pl šokómmélme·l)                                    
                                                                                    
           kušmé·l n black person (pl kušmélme·l)                                   
                                                                                    
            kušmé·l tikáw n monkey (pl. kušmé·l šaktikáw)                           
                                                                                    
           noktewmélme·l n goose                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         397                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           mélme·l sv to be black all over                                          
                                                                                    
           méˑlš tv to blacken something                                            
                                                                                    
            hatméˑlš iv to paint oneself black                                      
                                                                                    
           táy mé·l n Bayou Noir (now Black Bayou)                                  
                                                                                    
          míˑl n mucus                                                              
                                                                                    
          mihiŋpáhc n rainbow (var. miˑŋpáhc)                                       
                                                                                    
          mílš sv to be blind                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          mín sv to be weak (pl. mínmin)                                            
                                                                                    
          míŋ n bee                                                                 
                                                                                    
           miŋáˑk n honey                                                           
                                                                                    
           míŋ áŋšakhópš n carpenter bee                                            
                                                                                    
           míŋpá n beehive                                                          
                                                                                    
           míŋšakyóŋ n wasp                                                         
                                                                                    
          míš tv to give something to someone                                       
                                                                                    
          mišké·š tv to make to be around                                           
                                                                                    
           áknak mišké·š n eddy                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           hatmišké·š iv to spread around in a circle                               
                                                                                    
             né· hatmišké·š n horizon                                               
                                                                                    
           mišké·š pp around                                                        
                                                                                    
          mók iv to arrive (sg.) (var. móh) (pl. náw)                               
                                                                                    
          mók sv to be short (pl. mókmok)                                           
                                                                                    
           áŋkat mók n window (pl áŋkat mokmók)                                     
                                                                                    
            áŋkat mók ucúc ka n pointed window (pl áŋkat mokmók ucúc ka)            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         398                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kišmók n woman’s proper name                                             
                                                                                    
           okotkáwš mók n waistcoat                                                 
                                                                                    
          mókš tv to borrow from someone                                            
                                                                                    
           hatmókš tv to lend to someone                                            
                                                                                    
          móˑm n mole                                                               
                                                                                    
           móˑmwáŋne n molehill                                                     
                                                                                    
          moˑn iv to be all (inan.)                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           itháŋ moˑn n everywhere                                                  
                                                                                    
           móˑni iv to be all (animate)                                             
                                                                                    
          móyu n pumpkin                                                            
                                                                                    
          múkc iv to go out, of a fire                                              
                                                                                    
          múŋ iv to be fragrant                                                     
                                                                                    
           néšmúŋ n pine                                                            
                                                                                    
            néšmúŋ néš n pine tree                                                  
                                                                                    
            nešmuŋéŋ n pine resin; tar                                              
                                                                                    
          múŋš tv to smell something                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           múŋmuŋš tv to smell around for something                                 
                                                                                    
                                          N                                         
                                                                                    
          ná pro you (sg)                                                           
                                                                                    
           na poss your (sg)                                                        
                                                                                    
           na núk pro yourself                                                      
                                                                                    
           nakít pro you (pl); your (pl)                                            
                                                                                    
            nakít núk pro yourselves                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         399                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          náˑc n insect                                                             
                                                                                    
           náˑc šaŋšáŋ n caterpillar                                                
                                                                                    
           náˑc yilyíl n firefly                                                    
                                                                                    
          náhc n turtle                                                             
                                                                                    
           náhc máŋ n yellow-bellied slider, a turtle species                       
                                                                                    
          náhka adv must not                                                        
                                                                                    
          nakít pro you (pl); your (pl)                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          náˑkš tv to hear something                                                
                                                                                    
           hatnáˑkš iv to listen                                                    
                                                                                    
          nákš iv play a musical instrument                                         
                                                                                    
           nakšnán n musical instrument; violin                                     
                                                                                    
          nákš tv to point at something                                             
                                                                                    
           wóšnák n index finger                                                    
                                                                                    
          nákta adv right now                                                       
                                                                                    
          náˑl sv to be shallow; to ebb, of the tide                                
                                                                                    
           túl ná·l iv for the tide to be low                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          nál tv to hunt something                                                  
                                                                                    
          nál n sinew; ligament; tendon                                             
                                                                                    
           ákitoš nalmáŋmaŋ n spring frog                                           
                                                                                    
           n̥ té nál n throat                                                       
                                                                                    
           túc nál n calf of leg; tendon of foot                                    
                                                                                    
          nám tv to beg of someone                                                  
                                                                                    
          náw n moccasin; shoe                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         400                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           náw húy n shoe sole                                                      
                                                                                    
           náw káckac n slippers                                                    
                                                                                    
           náw kokkop n stockings                                                   
                                                                                    
            náw kokkop hatkáyišne n garters                                         
                                                                                    
            náw kokkop yúlyul n striped stockings                                   
                                                                                    
          náw n fur, feather, body hair                                             
                                                                                    
           anhipón náw n wool                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kalnáw n man’s proper name                                               
                                                                                    
           katnáw n beard; moustache                                                
                                                                                    
            kátnaw hatlášne n razor                                                 
                                                                                    
           náw líl n down feathers                                                  
                                                                                    
           náwóh n chinquapin (pl nawóhoh)                                          
                                                                                    
           náw tóˑt n down feathers                                                 
                                                                                    
           nók náw n armpit hair                                                    
                                                                                    
           n̥ té náw n mane                                                         
                                                                                    
           wóˑl náw n eyebrow                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          náw iv to arrive (pl) (sg. mók)                                           
                                                                                    
          náwš tv to allow someone; to let someone; to make someone                 
                                                                                    
          náwšo n brier                                                             
                                                                                    
          náy sv to think                                                           
                                                                                    
          náy tv to put something; to place something (var. néy)                    
                                                                                    
          néˑ n earth; land; country                                                
                                                                                    
           cáyon néˑ n Mexico; Texas                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         401                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           neˑ cák n dry land                                                       
                                                                                    
           neˑhatmišké·š n horizon                                                  
                                                                                    
           né· hiwéwš n mile                                                        
                                                                                    
           néˑiwáŋš n earthquake                                                    
                                                                                    
           neˑmák n mountain                                                        
                                                                                    
           neˑmoˑn n the world; United States                                       
                                                                                    
           ne·póm tv to plow something                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            neˑpóm n plow                                                           
                                                                                    
              neˑpómne n plowshare                                                  
                                                                                    
              neˑyuš neˑpóm n plowed field                                          
                                                                                    
              šikóm néˑpómne n plow oxen                                            
                                                                                    
            ne·pompom tv to plow something repeatedly                               
                                                                                    
           neˑšílš tv to sweep something                                            
                                                                                    
            neˑšilšnán n broom                                                      
                                                                                    
           ne·talankáw n sloping land; slope                                        
                                                                                    
           neˑtám n hole dug in the ground; grave                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            neˑtámnan n shovel                                                      
                                                                                    
           néˑƛót n elevated piece of ground                                        
                                                                                    
           neˑyuš n field                                                           
                                                                                    
            cóhoc neˑyuš n cornfield                                                
                                                                                    
            néš takámš neˑyuš n field fenced with branches                          
                                                                                    
            neˑyuš neˑpóm n plowed field                                            
                                                                                    
           néˑway n brick                                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         402                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            néˑway áŋ n brick house                                                 
                                                                                    
           šakhimóˑšnéˑ n cemetery                                                  
                                                                                    
           táyip néˑ n river island                                                 
                                                                                    
          néˑp sv to be low (pl. népneˑp)                                           
                                                                                    
          neˑšišk n salt (in combination néšk- )                                    
                                                                                    
           ne·šišk káwne n salt-cellar                                              
                                                                                    
           néškol n sugar                                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            néškolaˑk n molasses                                                    
                                                                                    
            néškoltu n sugar cane                                                   
                                                                                    
              neškoltú líline n sugar press                                         
                                                                                    
          né pp below                                                               
                                                                                    
           kató né n lower lip                                                      
                                                                                    
           wóˑl kišáŋ né n lower eyelid                                             
                                                                                    
           néˑt adv to below; downwards ( < ne-ot)                                  
                                                                                    
           né ócot adv up from below                                                
                                                                                    
           né tíš iv to go down; to go downstairs                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          né sv to be ripe                                                          
                                                                                    
           nétatta·t n orange                                                       
                                                                                    
            nétatta·t néš n orange tree                                             
                                                                                    
          nékitoš n Natchitoches, Louisiana                                         
                                                                                    
          néš n wood; tree; stem                                                    
                                                                                    
           néšak n sawdust                                                          
                                                                                    
           néšcómš n cane, walking stick; club                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         403                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           nešéŋ n soap                                                             
                                                                                    
           néš hicón n stick                                                        
                                                                                    
           néš hópšne n auger                                                       
                                                                                    
           nešipáhš n saddle                                                        
                                                                                    
           néš išóˑl n wooden nail                                                  
                                                                                    
           néš išó·m n brush                                                        
                                                                                    
           néškiŋšne n saw                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           néškiŋštámšáŋ n sawmill                                                  
                                                                                    
           néš kúc n red oak                                                        
                                                                                    
           néš mák n knot in wood                                                   
                                                                                    
           néš láwine n firewood                                                    
                                                                                    
           néšmúŋ n pine                                                            
                                                                                    
            nešmuŋéŋ n pine resin; tar                                              
                                                                                    
            néšmúŋ néš n pine tree                                                  
                                                                                    
           néšpá n wooden mortar                                                    
                                                                                    
            néšpá wáˑk n pestle                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           néšpál n board; wagon; cart                                              
                                                                                    
            nešpalhicón n small board; buggy                                        
                                                                                    
            néšpál lumlúmiš n wheel on a vehicle                                    
                                                                                    
              néšpalpál n planks; shingles                                          
                                                                                    
               néšpalpál hicón n cypress shingles                                   
                                                                                    
           néš šíht n bucket; barrel                                                
                                                                                    
           néš šokitáwne n scaffold                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         404                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           néš šokyúlšne n pencil                                                   
                                                                                    
           néš takáwš n branch (pl. néš takámš)                                     
                                                                                    
            néš takámš n branches; brushwood                                        
                                                                                    
              néš takámš neˑyuš n field fenced with branches                        
                                                                                    
           néštál n bark                                                            
                                                                                    
            néštál kimáti n bark fiber                                              
                                                                                    
            néštál ól n cinnamon                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           néštámš n rail                                                           
                                                                                    
            neštámš kakók n rail fence; board fence                                 
                                                                                    
            neštámš ní·t kakók n five-rail fence                                    
                                                                                    
            néštámš né n wedge                                                      
                                                                                    
           néš tewáš máŋmaŋ n magnolia                                              
                                                                                    
           néš tól n piece of hardwood (pl néš tóltol)                              
                                                                                    
           néš ƛópne n post                                                         
                                                                                    
           néš wáˑl n wooden floor or ceiling                                       
                                                                                    
           néš wáŋne n footbridge                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           néš wáš n tree leaf (pl. néš téwaš)                                      
                                                                                    
            néš wáš táˑt sv to be brown                                             
                                                                                    
           néšwí·l n tree root                                                      
                                                                                    
           téłk néš n flowering tree                                                
                                                                                    
          netík iv to come down                                                     
                                                                                    
          néy tv to put something; to place something (var. náy)                    
                                                                                    
          níhuwe iv to lie down (sg) (pl. nók/nókiš)                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         405                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ník n milk                                                                
                                                                                    
           níkeŋ n butter                                                           
                                                                                    
          nikáw tv to chase something                                               
                                                                                    
          nikš n chewing gum                                                        
                                                                                    
          nikúc n breast; nipple                                                    
                                                                                    
          níl n grandchild; granddaughter (?) (pl šakníl)                           
                                                                                    
          nilá n grandmother                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          nimá tv to kill something                                                 
                                                                                    
          níŋ n louse                                                               
                                                                                    
           níŋcil n louse egg                                                       
                                                                                    
          niyál n lynx; bobcat                                                      
                                                                                    
          níˑt n thorn; honeylocust tree                                            
                                                                                    
          ní·t n five                                                               
                                                                                    
           ní·tip adv five times                                                    
                                                                                    
           ní·tsim sv to be five apiece; to be five to each                         
                                                                                    
          nóˑ spoon                                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          nóh n horn of an animal                                                   
                                                                                    
           nóh takámš n antlers                                                     
                                                                                    
          nohámš n chicken                                                          
                                                                                    
           nohámš áyip n gallinule                                                  
                                                                                    
           nohámš išó·m n chicks                                                    
                                                                                    
           nohámš kíš n hen                                                         
                                                                                    
           nohámš kú n chicken’s egg                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         406                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            nohámš kú kóp n egg white                                               
                                                                                    
            nohámš kú tál n eggshell                                                
                                                                                    
            nohámš kú tá·t n egg yolk                                               
                                                                                    
           nohámš šakyól n rooster                                                  
                                                                                    
           nohámš ucpáhš n a setting hen                                            
                                                                                    
          nóhay n Koasati Indian                                                    
                                                                                    
          nók iv to lie down (pl.; sg. níhuwe) (var. nókiš)                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          nók n arm; wing; fin                                                      
                                                                                    
           nokáˑt n armpit                                                          
                                                                                    
           nók hál n tail fin of a fish                                             
                                                                                    
           nók kám n fin of a fish (pl nók kamkám)                                  
                                                                                    
            nokkám n  shark                                                         
                                                                                    
           nokkáwne n wing of a bird                                                
                                                                                    
           nók kócti n left arm                                                     
                                                                                    
           nóknáw n wing feather; hair under arm (pl. šaknóknáw)                    
                                                                                    
           nók né·p n lower arm                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           nók óc n upper arm                                                       
                                                                                    
           nókšuk n elbow                                                           
                                                                                    
            nókšuk kócti n left elbow                                               
                                                                                    
            nókšuk wóšti n right elbow                                              
                                                                                    
           noktéw n shoulder                                                        
                                                                                    
            noktewmélme·l n goose                                                   
                                                                                    
           nók wóšti n right arm                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         407                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           okotkawšmáŋ nók n coat sleeve                                            
                                                                                    
          nól n river bank                                                          
                                                                                    
           nólkop n man’s proper name; son of Louison                               
                                                                                    
          nómš n child (pl šaknómš)                                                 
                                                                                    
           kešéš nómš n little girls                                                
                                                                                    
           šakyól nómš n little boy                                                 
                                                                                    
          núk n self                                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           ha núk pro himself; herself; itself                                      
                                                                                    
           hakít núk pro themselves                                                 
                                                                                    
            hakít cíˑk núk pro the two of themselves                                
                                                                                    
           na núk pro yourself                                                      
                                                                                    
           nakít núk pro yourselves                                                 
                                                                                    
           wi núk pro myself                                                        
                                                                                    
           yukít núk pro ourselves                                                  
                                                                                    
          núl n foundation                                                          
                                                                                    
          núl iv to dwell (pl) (sg. kéˑt)                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           nuŋnúl iv to dwell in a village (pl) (sg. nuŋkéˑt)                       
                                                                                    
          núm n side of an animal                                                   
                                                                                    
          núŋ n village                                                             
                                                                                    
           nuŋkéˑt iv to dwell in a village (sg)                                    
                                                                                    
           nunnúl iv to dwell in a village (pl)                                     
                                                                                    
           nuŋúš n city; New Orleans                                                
                                                                                    
            nuŋúšip cokóy n judge                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         408                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            nuŋúš wáŋne n street                                                    
                                                                                    
           túl núŋ n name of the village on the east side of Lake Prien             
                                                                                    
                                          N̥                                        
                                                                                    
          n̥ céˑt n man’s (?) brother (cf. išn̥ céˑt)                               
                                                                                    
          n̥ hóh n face paint                                                       
                                                                                    
           n̥ hóhkuc n vermillion                                                   
                                                                                    
          n̥ táh iv to get out; to escape                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          n̥ tán iv to be either/or                                                 
                                                                                    
          n̥ té n neck                                                              
                                                                                    
           n̥ té nál n throat                                                       
                                                                                    
           n̥ té okyúl n neckerchief; necktie                                       
                                                                                    
           n̥ té šúk n back of the neck                                             
                                                                                    
           okotkáwš n̥ té šúk n shirt collar                                        
                                                                                    
          n̥ téhi tv to frighten someone                                            
                                                                                    
          n̥ tí n catfish; fish                                                     
                                                                                    
           n̥ tí šaklúš n fish scales                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          n̥ túl n mouth of a river                                                 
                                                                                    
          n̥ túlš tv to take something out                                          
                                                                                    
           tó·c n̥ túlš tv to suck something out                                    
                                                                                    
                                          O                                         
                                                                                    
          óˑ n string, cord, rope                                                   
                                                                                    
           kokkókišóˑ n fishing line (var. kokkókiš óˑ)                             
                                                                                    
           té óˑ n bowstring                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         409                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ó pp near                                                                 
                                                                                    
           ó iv to be near                                                          
                                                                                    
          óc n tooth; grain                                                         
                                                                                    
           cóhoc óc n grain of corn                                                 
                                                                                    
           kapí óc n coffee grounds                                                 
                                                                                    
           ócci n jawbone                                                           
                                                                                    
           óc hálkin n back teeth                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           óc iškám n molar tooth                                                   
                                                                                    
           óc íˑtkin n front teeth                                                  
                                                                                    
          óc pp on top of                                                           
                                                                                    
             n top                                                                  
                                                                                    
          océh n snake                                                              
                                                                                    
           kawkáw océh n water snake                                                
                                                                                    
           nohámš océh n chicken snake                                              
                                                                                    
           océh hiwéw n rattlesnake                                                 
                                                                                    
           océh šoktéy hacehéš n snake venom                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           océh talkóp n blue racer snake                                           
                                                                                    
           océh yúl n garter snake                                                  
                                                                                    
           océh méˑl n water moccasin                                               
                                                                                    
           océh táy n Serpent Bayou                                                 
                                                                                    
          óci pp over; above                                                        
                                                                                    
          óci adv aloud                                                             
                                                                                    
          ocottáˑt n God (originally: she who stands abovewards)                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         410                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           ocottáˑt hiyóˑl n Jesus                                                  
                                                                                    
          óh sv to be sharp; thorny (pl. óhoh)                                      
                                                                                    
           ohóh n briers                                                            
                                                                                    
          óˑkš n cheek                                                              
                                                                                    
           óˑkš áˑl n cheek                                                         
                                                                                    
            óˑkš áˑl hatkúcišne n rouge                                             
                                                                                    
          ók iv to come                                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ók n cloth; blanket                                                       
                                                                                    
           ók hicám n double blanket                                                
                                                                                    
           okhíya n sail of a boat                                                  
                                                                                    
           ókik ká n made of cloth                                                  
                                                                                    
           okišó·m n thread                                                         
                                                                                    
            okišó·m éŋišne n wax                                                    
                                                                                    
            okišó·m tókš n spool                                                    
                                                                                    
           okiyáw n flag; sail                                                      
                                                                                    
           okká tv to weave something                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            okká n woven cloth                                                      
                                                                                    
           okotkáwš n shirt (pl okotkámš)                                           
                                                                                    
            okotkáwšmáŋ n coat                                                      
                                                                                    
              okotkáwšmáŋ hópš n coat buttonhole                                    
                                                                                    
              okotkáwšmáŋ nók n coat sleeve                                         
                                                                                    
            okotkáwš mók n waistcoat                                                
                                                                                    
            okotkáwš n̥ té šúk n shirt collar                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         411                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           okyúl n handkerchief                                                     
                                                                                    
            n̥ té okyúl n neckerchief; necktie                                      
                                                                                    
            okyúl iškám n shawl                                                     
                                                                                    
          okéˑt n mother                                                            
                                                                                    
           okéˑtpél n stepmother                                                    
                                                                                    
          óˑl pp near                                                               
                                                                                    
           óˑl sv to be near                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            óˑl iwá·t iv to move nearer                                             
                                                                                    
          óˑl n hunger                                                              
                                                                                    
           óˑl káw sv to be hungry (sg) (pl *óˑl cappíhk)                           
                                                                                    
          óˑl n persimmon                                                           
                                                                                    
           kiwílš óˑl n apple                                                       
                                                                                    
            kiwílš óˑl néš n apple tree                                             
                                                                                    
          ól sv to be sweet (pl ólol)                                               
                                                                                    
           néškol n sugar                                                           
                                                                                    
            néškolaˑk n molasses                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            néškoltu n sugar cane                                                   
                                                                                    
              neškoltú líline n sugar press                                         
                                                                                    
           néštál ól n cinnamon                                                     
                                                                                    
          ón intj come on!                                                          
                                                                                    
          onpác sv to be sour; bitter (var anpác)                                   
                                                                                    
           kawkáw onpác n vinegar; root beer                                        
                                                                                    
           šokwák onpác n yeast; raised bread                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         412                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          óŋ n grass                                                                
                                                                                    
           óŋ cák n hay, straw                                                      
                                                                                    
           óŋ hómhom n prairie chicken Tympanuchus cupido                           
                                                                                    
           óŋ il n garter snake                                                     
                                                                                    
           óŋ táˑt sv to be grass-green                                             
                                                                                    
           óŋ yáŋ sv to be grass-green                                              
                                                                                    
          óŋi tv to thread a needle                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           hatakinán óŋi n string of beads                                          
                                                                                    
          óŋš sv not to want (positive kóh)                                         
                                                                                    
          ópo n ribbon                                                              
                                                                                    
          óˑš pp at the edge of (var. óˑši)                                         
                                                                                    
            táy óˑš n riverbank (var. táy óˑši)                                     
                                                                                    
          óˑt n terrapin                                                            
                                                                                    
          óy iv to sleep                                                            
                                                                                    
          óy tv to send something                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          P                                         
                                                                                    
          pá n nest                                                                 
                                                                                    
           icáˑkpá n anthill                                                        
                                                                                    
           míŋpá n beehive                                                          
                                                                                    
           šakšóšpá n bird’s nest                                                   
                                                                                    
          pá n mortar                                                               
                                                                                    
           néšpá n wooden mortar                                                    
                                                                                    
            néšpá wáˑk n wooden pestle                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         413                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           pá wáˑk n pestle                                                         
                                                                                    
           wáypá n stone mortar                                                     
                                                                                    
            wáypá wáˑk n stone pestle                                               
                                                                                    
          páˑc tv to squeeze something                                              
                                                                                    
          pác tv to wash something (varr. pácem; páciš)                             
                                                                                    
           pác míš tv to do washing for someone                                     
                                                                                    
          pác tv to whip something                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           páciš n whip                                                             
                                                                                    
          paccalšópš n squirrel (varr. pakcalšópš; pacacó)                          
                                                                                    
          páhiš tv to open something                                                
                                                                                    
           koŋpáhiš tv to pull something out                                        
                                                                                    
          páhš tv to listen to something                                            
                                                                                    
          páhš sv to be thin (pl páhpahš)                                           
                                                                                    
          páhš tv to flatten something                                              
                                                                                    
           nohámš ucpáhš n a setting hen                                            
                                                                                    
          páhw n seven                                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           páhwip adv seven times                                                   
                                                                                    
           páhwsim iv to be seven apiece; seven to each                             
                                                                                    
          pák tv to step on something; to strike something; to beat something (pl. pám)
                                                                                    
           pák n footprint (pl. pám)                                                
                                                                                    
            paknúl iv to leave a footprint                                          
                                                                                    
            pamnúl iv to leave footprints                                           
                                                                                    
            pámišik tv to ford something on foot                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         414                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            pampámš  iv to tramp around                                             
                                                                                    
            pámtámne n staircase                                                    
                                                                                    
          pákan n pecan (< French)                                                  
                                                                                    
           pákan néš n pecan tree                                                   
                                                                                    
          pakcakš n hickory                                                         
                                                                                    
           pakcakš néš n hickory tree                                               
                                                                                    
           pakcalšópš n squirrel (varr. paccalšópš; pacacó)                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          pákiš v to throw something                                                
                                                                                    
           kocpákiš tv to cut something down                                        
                                                                                    
          paknáw iv to run                                                          
                                                                                    
           paknáwcá·t iv to run quickly                                             
                                                                                    
          paknúl iv to leave a footprint                                            
                                                                                    
           pamnúl iv to leave footprints                                            
                                                                                    
          pákš tv to flap something                                                 
                                                                                    
           anpákš n mouse                                                           
                                                                                    
            anpákš héc n rat                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           šopákš n heart palpitation                                               
                                                                                    
          pál sv to be flat (pl. pálpal)                                            
                                                                                    
           pálš tv to flatten something (sg)                                        
                                                                                    
            palpáliš tv to flatten something (pl)                                   
                                                                                    
           nešpalhicón n 1. small board; 2. buggy                                   
                                                                                    
           néšpál lumlúmiš n wheel on a vehicle                                     
                                                                                    
            néšpalpál n planks; shingles                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         415                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
              néšpalpál hicón n cypress shingles                                    
                                                                                    
           pálnal n man’s personal name                                             
                                                                                    
          páł tv to break something; to split something (var. pál)                  
                                                                                    
           páłi tv to break something of someone’s                                  
                                                                                    
           palpáł tv to break something in different places                         
                                                                                    
                 iv to be broken in different places                                
                                                                                    
          pám tv to step on something (pl); to strike something (pl); to beat something (pl) (sg. pák)
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           (var. var. pámš)                                                         
                                                                                    
           pám  n footprints (sg. pák)                                              
                                                                                    
            pamnúl iv to leave footprints (sg. paknúl)                              
                                                                                    
           pámišik tv to ford something on foot                                     
                                                                                    
           pámkamne n hammer                                                        
                                                                                    
           pampámš iv to tramp around                                               
                                                                                    
           pámtámne n staircase                                                     
                                                                                    
          pamhokáy n large cocklebur (cf. tancipál)                                 
                                                                                    
          pámiš tv to throw something; to throw something away, one at a time; to scatter seeds
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          pániš tv to shut something; to close something                            
                                                                                    
           ánpanš n deaf person                                                     
                                                                                    
           wóˑš hatpániš iv to clasp one’s hands                                    
                                                                                    
          páˑš tv to cover something                                                
                                                                                    
           hatpáˑšne n armor                                                        
                                                                                    
           kakáw hiwéwš páˑš n watch cover                                          
                                                                                    
           šíht páˑš n kettle cover                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         416                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           wóˑl páˑš n eyelid                                                       
                                                                                    
          pátitéw n cotton                                                          
                                                                                    
           pátitéw híš n cotton plant                                               
                                                                                    
           pátitéw šó n cotton seed                                                 
                                                                                    
          páw iv to swing (sg)                                                      
                                                                                    
           pawpaw iv to swing (pl)                                                  
                                                                                    
           páwiš tv to swing something                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          páw tv to whirl something                                                 
                                                                                    
          pay- prefix too                                                           
                                                                                    
           payhatnáhuš sv to be too little                                          
                                                                                    
           payhéc sv to be too big                                                  
                                                                                    
           payhéwš sv to be too much                                                
                                                                                    
           paytóluš sv to be generous (pl. paytoltóluš)                             
                                                                                    
          páy tv to turn something over                                             
                                                                                    
          payákš adv again                                                          
                                                                                    
          payhál n buttocks                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          payók iv to come back                                                     
                                                                                    
                tv to bring something back                                          
                                                                                    
          páyš tv to chop something                                                 
                                                                                    
           páyš n chopping instrument                                               
                                                                                    
            páyš héc n axe                                                          
                                                                                    
            páyš hicón n hatchet                                                    
                                                                                    
          péh iv to stop; to finish                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         417                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           hatpéh sv to be ready                                                    
                                                                                    
           itiyílš péh iv to be half moon                                           
                                                                                    
           péhi tv to stop something; to finish something                           
                                                                                    
          pél sv to be far                                                          
                                                                                    
           hatnáhka pél adv how far?                                                
                                                                                    
           itéˑtpél n stepfather                                                    
                                                                                    
           okéˑtpél n stepmother                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           pél hathúne n spyglass; telescope                                        
                                                                                    
           pél adv far off                                                          
                                                                                    
          péˑm iv to shoot with a bow or gun                                        
                                                                                    
           péˑm n gun                                                               
                                                                                    
            péˑm héc n cannon                                                       
                                                                                    
            péˑm kaccíˑk n double-barrelled gun                                     
                                                                                    
            péˑmmók n pistol                                                        
                                                                                    
          pémst sv to be tired (pl) (sg. pétst)                                     
                                                                                    
          péni tv to cure someone; to heal someone                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          pét iv to be completed                                                    
                                                                                    
           yilhiwéw pétik yíl n Monday                                              
                                                                                    
          pétst sv to be tired (sg) (pl. pémst)                                     
                                                                                    
          péw iv to swell, of wood                                                  
                                                                                    
           péwiš tv to make something of wood swell                                 
                                                                                    
           šokwák péwiš n raised bread; yeasted bread                               
                                                                                    
          picíw n chigger                                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         418                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          píhk sv to die (pl) (third person form šappíhk) (sg káw)                  
                                                                                    
           kawkáw píhk sv to be thirsty (pl) (sg kawkáw káw)                        
                                                                                    
           kicá·k píhk sv to be drunk (pl) (sg. kicá·k káw)                         
                                                                                    
          píl n bed                                                                 
                                                                                    
           píl lumlúmiš n bed roller                                                
                                                                                    
          píš iv to twist                                                           
                                                                                    
           píš hópšne n gimlet                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           wáy píš hópšne n stone borer                                             
                                                                                    
          píš sv to be crooked (pl píšpiš)                                          
                                                                                    
             tv to make something crooked (pl píšpiš)                               
                                                                                    
          píˑt n perch fish, patassa                                                
                                                                                    
          pó sv to be narrow (pl. pópo)                                             
                                                                                    
          póciš tv to release something; to shoot an arrow                          
                                                                                    
          póh n smoke; mist; fog                                                    
                                                                                    
           póh iv to be misty; to be smoky; to smoke                                
                                                                                    
           poháŋ n smokehouse                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           póhhitáwne n chimney                                                     
                                                                                    
           tupóˑpwáŋ n steamboat (var. tupóhipwáŋ)                                  
                                                                                    
          póhol sv to be lowered                                                    
                                                                                    
          pól iv to float (sg)                                                      
                                                                                    
           pólpol iv to float (pl)                                                  
                                                                                    
          pólš iv to gallop (sg)                                                    
                                                                                    
           pólpolš iv to gallop (pl)                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         419                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                 tv to cause something to gallop                                    
                                                                                    
            pólpolšcá·t iv to gallop quickly                                        
                                                                                    
          póšk n blood                                                              
                                                                                    
           póšk sv to bleed                                                         
                                                                                    
           póškáŋ n veins                                                           
                                                                                    
          púh iv to jump                                                            
                                                                                    
           puhhatipáciš iv to turn a somersault after jumping into the air          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           puhicéš tv to jump over something                                        
                                                                                    
           puhiníh iv to jump through (object in locative case)                     
                                                                                    
          púk iv to be full                                                         
                                                                                    
          púm iv to dance (secular dance, c.f. šoká·k ‘to dance a ceremonial dance’)
                                                                                    
           púm  n dance                                                             
                                                                                    
          púmpumš n flea                                                            
                                                                                    
          púns tv to blow at something                                              
                                                                                    
           hatpunpúns n porpoise                                                    
                                                                                    
           punpáyiš tv to blow something off                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           tikpúns n blowgun                                                        
                                                                                    
          púškin adv outdoors                                                       
                                                                                    
                                          Š                                         
                                                                                    
          sámedi n Saturday (varr. sámedi yíl; samtí) (<French samedi)              
                                                                                    
          šá n someone                                                              
                                                                                    
           šášo n (with negative verb) no one                                       
                                                                                    
          šakhimóˑšnéˑ n cemetery                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         420                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          šakí·kš iv to buy                                                         
                                                                                    
          šákik tv to wound someone                                                 
                                                                                    
           šakšakik tv to wound someone in various places                           
                                                                                    
          šakišaˑk n relatives                                                      
                                                                                    
          šakitéwkáwine n chair (varr. šakitéwkáwne; šakitéwkáne)                   
                                                                                    
          šakkáw n white person, archaic                                            
                                                                                    
            šakkáw kóy úhc n person who can speak the language of the white people  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          šaklámš n leech                                                           
                                                                                    
          šakn̥ óns iv to visit people [root -n̥ónš]                                
                                                                                    
          šakó n bear                                                               
                                                                                    
          šá·kš n fox                                                               
                                                                                    
          šakšóš n bird                                                             
                                                                                    
           šakšoš icktattá·t n meadowlark                                           
                                                                                    
           šakšóšpá n bird’s nest                                                   
                                                                                    
          šaktálkoh n the Skin-Desirer (var. štálkoh)                               
                                                                                    
          šakwáši n old man                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           šakwáši šokák n old men’s dance                                          
                                                                                    
          šakyám iv to tell lies                                                    
                                                                                    
           šakyám n lie; liar                                                       
                                                                                    
          šakyól n man; male                                                        
                                                                                    
           šakyól iškalít n boy                                                     
                                                                                    
           šakyól nómš n little boy                                                 
                                                                                    
           šakyólšokhatké n trousers                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         421                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           šakyólhuyhatké n underwear                                               
                                                                                    
           hišan šakyól n father-in-law                                             
                                                                                    
           nohámš šakyól n rooster                                                  
                                                                                    
           šokón šakyól n bull                                                      
                                                                                    
          šámš n wolf; coyote                                                       
                                                                                    
           šámš téktekš n ocelot (?)                                                
                                                                                    
          šáŋ iv to have a burning sting (pl šaŋšáŋ)                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           náˑc šaŋšáŋ n caterpillar                                                
                                                                                    
          šappíhk sv to die (pl) (first/second person form píhk) (sg káw)           
                                                                                    
          šatná adv better                                                          
                                                                                    
          šé n marble; pebble                                                       
                                                                                    
          šéˑš n babies (sg. cíš)                                                   
                                                                                    
          šéš n fig; mulberry                                                       
                                                                                    
           šéš nékin n July                                                         
                                                                                    
           šéš néš n fig tree                                                       
                                                                                    
          šiht n pot, basin, bucket, pail, kettle, pitcher                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           éŋkáwne šiht n grease jar                                                
                                                                                    
           kocnán šiht n iron kettle                                                
                                                                                    
           šihtkómhiš n bell                                                        
                                                                                    
           šihtkópahš n tumbler; goblet                                             
                                                                                    
           šíht páˑš n kettle cover                                                 
                                                                                    
           šihtpál n piece of pottery; jar; pot; plate; oven [var išpál]            
                                                                                    
           wáy šíht n stone jug                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         422                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          šikitíš n skunk                                                           
                                                                                    
          ši·l n sail < English                                                     
                                                                                    
           túšiˑl n schooner                                                        
                                                                                    
          šil tv to sew something                                                   
                                                                                    
           šokšíl iv to be sewing                                                   
                                                                                    
            šokšílnan n sewing machine                                              
                                                                                    
           šilšíl tv to sew many things                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           šilyúlš iv to make embroideries                                          
                                                                                    
          šíli sv to be beautiful; to be handsome (pl. šilšili) (var. šíliŋ)        
                                                                                    
          šinnéw pro who? (pl)                                                      
                                                                                    
          *šiŋš tv to rattle something                                              
                                                                                    
           šíŋšne n gourd rattle (var. šiŋšnán)                                     
                                                                                    
          šít n Spanish moss                                                        
                                                                                    
           šítyáŋ n green Spanish moss                                              
                                                                                    
           šit ílil n green (live) Spanish moss                                     
                                                                                    
           šit mélmeˑl n black (dead) Spanish moss                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          šíw iv to crawl                                                           
                                                                                    
           šiwcá·t iv to crawl quickly                                              
                                                                                    
          šiwán n cat                                                               
                                                                                    
           šiwán išó·l n kitten                                                     
                                                                                    
          šiwát n alligator                                                         
                                                                                    
           šiwátteˑnéš n prickly ash tree                                           
                                                                                    
          skalé n 12 1/2 cents (< French escalin)                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         423                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           skalé himatól n half-dollar                                              
                                                                                    
          škalškáˑš n fool                                                          
                                                                                    
          škóp n cup; dipper                                                        
                                                                                    
           škópol n large bowl                                                      
                                                                                    
          šnáyke n man’s proper name (<šuknáyke)                                    
                                                                                    
          šo adv ever                                                               
                                                                                    
           šoháh adv never                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          šó n seed; heart; soul (pl. šakšó)                                        
                                                                                    
           šó kúckuc n red pepper                                                   
                                                                                    
           šopákš n heart palpitation                                               
                                                                                    
           tépuk šó tikáw n almond                                                  
                                                                                    
          šohkóy n basket                                                           
                                                                                    
           šohkóy iv to make baskets                                                
                                                                                    
          šók n thing                                                               
                                                                                    
           šokáˑm iv to cook                                                        
                                                                                    
            šokáˑm n a cook                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            šokáˑmáŋ n kitchen                                                      
                                                                                    
           šokcipál n glue                                                          
                                                                                    
           šokmóˑn n everything; property                                           
                                                                                    
           šoktókš n ball                                                           
                                                                                    
           šoktól n luck                                                            
                                                                                    
           šokúhc iv to be smart; intelligent                                       
                                                                                    
           šokyáh iv to eat                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         424                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            šokyáh n eater                                                          
                                                                                    
           šokyúlš n letter; writing                                                
                                                                                    
            šokyúlš hatúhciš áŋ n school                                            
                                                                                    
            šokyúlš hipón n book                                                    
                                                                                    
            šokyúlšne n pen; pencil                                                 
                                                                                    
          šoká·k iv to do a ceremonial dance (cf. púm ‘to do a secular dance’)      
                                                                                    
           šakwáši šoká·k n old men’s dance                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           šoká·k šókšukš n young men’s dance                                       
                                                                                    
          šokatkéŋiš n blackberry                                                   
                                                                                    
           šokatkéŋiš líl n strawberry                                              
                                                                                    
           šokatkéŋiš ámne n blackberry brandy (var. šokatkíŋiš kicáˑk)             
                                                                                    
          šokáy adv why?                                                            
                                                                                    
          šokéˑš sv to be sick (pl. šokšokéˑš)                                      
                                                                                    
          šokhatké n clothing                                                       
                                                                                    
           šakyólhuyhatké n underwear                                               
                                                                                    
           šakyólšokhatké n trousers                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          šokhipéˑn n friend                                                        
                                                                                    
          šokhíš n plant                                                            
                                                                                    
          šokká iv to work                                                          
                                                                                    
          šokké sv to be rich                                                       
                                                                                    
          šokkóc n tailor                                                           
                                                                                    
          šoklákš sv to be poor                                                     
                                                                                    
          šoklìkš sv to be contented; satisfied; pleased; rejoicing                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         425                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          šokmóˑn n property                                                        
                                                                                    
          šokmúŋ n bedbug                                                           
                                                                                    
          šoknáy n duck (var. šoknók)                                               
                                                                                    
           šnáyke n man’s proper name                                               
                                                                                    
          šoknók n duck (var. šoknáy)                                               
                                                                                    
           šoknók náw n duck feathers (used on arrows)                              
                                                                                    
          šokón n cow (varr. šikóm; šokóm; šokóŋ)                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           šikóm néˑpómne n plow oxen                                               
                                                                                    
           šokon áˑl n beef                                                         
                                                                                    
           šokón išó·l n calf                                                       
                                                                                    
           šokón ít n manure                                                        
                                                                                    
           šokón kíš n heifer                                                       
                                                                                    
           šokón šakyól n bull                                                      
                                                                                    
           šokón tíl n cowhide                                                      
                                                                                    
           šokónyúl n spotted ox (pl. šokónyúlyul)                                  
                                                                                    
           šokomméˑl n buffalo; bison (pl. šokommélmeˑl)                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          šokóy n chief; law                                                        
                                                                                    
           šokóy hattíc iv to go to court                                           
                                                                                    
           šokòy sv to be chief                                                     
                                                                                    
          šokšakcáŋš n thief                                                        
                                                                                    
          šokšakcúmšne n tweezers                                                   
                                                                                    
          šokšakyíkš n merchant                                                     
                                                                                    
           šokšakyíkšáŋ n storehouse                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         426                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          šokšakyóŋš iv to beg                                                      
                                                                                    
           šokšakyóŋ n beggar                                                       
                                                                                    
          šokšíw sv to be stingy; to be avaricious (pl. šokšiwšíw)                  
                                                                                    
          šokšo n (with negative verb) nothing                                      
                                                                                    
           šokšohán n nothing (<šokšo-hán)                                          
                                                                                    
          šókšukš n                                                                 
                                                                                    
           šókšukšáŋ n dance house (located in the village of Lo)                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           šókšukš šoka·k n young men’s dance                                       
                                                                                    
          šoktéy n medicine                                                         
                                                                                    
           šoktéy ám iv to take medicine                                            
                                                                                    
           šoktéy hacehéš n poison                                                  
                                                                                    
            šoktéy hacehéš hólš tv to bewitch someone                               
                                                                                    
           océh šoktéy hacehéš n snake venom                                        
                                                                                    
          šokwák n bread                                                            
                                                                                    
           šokwák hicóm n biscuit                                                   
                                                                                    
            šokwák hicóm óˑl n cake                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           šokwák onpác n yeast; raised bread                                       
                                                                                    
           šokwák péwiš n raised bread; yeasted bread                               
                                                                                    
           šokwák tál n bread crust                                                 
                                                                                    
          šokwán n conversation                                                     
                                                                                    
           šokwán šakúciš n interpreter                                             
                                                                                    
          šokwíl iv to squeal                                                       
                                                                                    
          šól tv to rub something                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         427                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           šólšol tv to rub something repeatedly                                    
                                                                                    
          šólk tv to pick up something (pl object)                                  
                                                                                    
          šóŋ iv to rattle; to rustle; to ring                                      
                                                                                    
           šóŋiš tv to ring something                                               
                                                                                    
          šóm sv to be swollen; to be heavily pregnant (pl. šómšom) (var. šómš)     
                                                                                    
          šošólš tv to frighten something (sg obj)                                  
                                                                                    
           šošómš tv to frighten something (pl obj)                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           hatšóšólš iv to be afraid                                                
                                                                                    
          šóywan sv to be mischevious; lively; full of fun (pl. šoywanšoywán)       
                                                                                    
          štálkoh n the Skin-Desirer (var. of šaktálkoh)                            
                                                                                    
          šuhéw tv to feel uneasy about something                                   
                                                                                    
          šúk n back end; downstream                                                
                                                                                    
           šúkike adv from downstream                                               
                                                                                    
           nókšuk n elbow                                                           
                                                                                    
            nókšuk kócti n left elbow                                               
                                                                                    
            nókšuk wóšti n right elbow                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           n̥ té šuk n nape of the neck                                             
                                                                                    
          šukíŋ n half                                                              
                                                                                    
           hálšukíŋ n one-half                                                      
                                                                                    
           šukíŋn̥ adv crossways                                                    
                                                                                    
           tanúk šukíŋ n one half                                                   
                                                                                    
          šukuhúy n man’s proper name                                               
                                                                                    
          šúl n dog                                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         428                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           šúl išóˑl n puppy                                                        
                                                                                    
           šúl kíš n female dog                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          T                                         
                                                                                    
          takámš iv to branch (pl) (sg. takáwš)                                     
                                                                                    
           néš takámš n branches; brushwood                                         
                                                                                    
            néš takámš neˑyuš n field fenced with branches                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           nóh takámš n antlers                                                     
                                                                                    
           takáwš iv to branch (sg)                                                 
                                                                                    
            néš takáwš n branch (pl. néš takámš)                                    
                                                                                    
          tákapa n Atakapa (< Choctaw hattak apa)                                   
                                                                                    
          takáwš iv to branch (sg) (pl. takámš)                                     
                                                                                    
          tál n hole                                                                
                                                                                    
           tálsim sv to be nothing but holes                                        
                                                                                    
          tál v shell, skin, husk, bark                                             
                                                                                    
           cóhoc tál n cornhusk                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kanán tál n turtleshell                                                  
                                                                                    
           néštál n bark                                                            
                                                                                    
            néštál kimáti n bark fiber                                              
                                                                                    
            néštál ól n cinnamon                                                    
                                                                                    
           nohámš kú tál n eggshell                                                 
                                                                                    
           šaktálkoh n the Skin-Desirer (var. štálkoh)                              
                                                                                    
           šokwák tál n bread crust                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         429                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           tanstál n paper; playing cards (< tanštál)                               
                                                                                    
            tanstál laklákš n paper money                                           
                                                                                    
          talankáw sv to be sloping                                                 
                                                                                    
          talháŋš n little blue heron                                               
                                                                                    
          talkóp sv to be blue                                                      
                                                                                    
           áyip téłk tálkop n marsh lily                                            
                                                                                    
           océh talkóp n blue racer snake                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           talkóp ináha sv to be bluish                                             
                                                                                    
           talkópka adv bluely                                                      
                                                                                    
           talkopkóp sv to be light blue                                            
                                                                                    
           talkópnaktalkóp sv to be dark blue                                       
                                                                                    
          tám iv to dig                                                             
                                                                                    
           néˑtám iv to dig in the ground                                           
                                                                                    
            néˑtám n hole in the ground; grave                                      
                                                                                    
            neˑtamnán n shovel                                                      
                                                                                    
          tám iv to climb                                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           pamtámne n stairs                                                        
                                                                                    
           támca·t iv to climb quickly                                              
                                                                                    
          tamhéwš n spider                                                          
                                                                                    
           tamhéwš hilám n venomous spider                                          
                                                                                    
           tamhéwš hilíni n spiderweb                                               
                                                                                    
          támš tv to split something (once, or sg. object)                          
                                                                                    
              iv to be split (sg)                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         430                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           tamtámš tv to split something repeatedly; to split (pl object)           
                                                                                    
                   iv to be split (pl)                                              
                                                                                    
           neštámš n board; rail                                                    
                                                                                    
            neštámš kakók n rail fence; board fence                                 
                                                                                    
          tán n another person (pl tannéw)                                          
                                                                                    
           tán adj another                                                          
                                                                                    
          tán v to be still; to be yet                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           yatán iv to be the same                                                  
                                                                                    
          tan                                                                       
                                                                                    
           tancipál n small cocklebur (cf. pamhokáy)                                
                                                                                    
          tanš                                                                      
                                                                                    
           tanstál n paper; playing cards (< tanš-tál)                              
                                                                                    
            tanstál laklákš n paper money                                           
                                                                                    
          tanúk n one                                                               
                                                                                    
           tanúk iv to be one                                                       
                                                                                    
           tanúkip adv once                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            hál tanúkip adv once more                                               
                                                                                    
           tanúkšim iv to be one apiece; one each                                   
                                                                                    
          taŋkóhi iv to jump in                                                     
                                                                                    
          táŋš sv to vomit                                                          
                                                                                    
          táˑt iv to stand (sg) (pl cóˑt)                                           
                                                                                    
              iv to be located, of buildings                                        
                                                                                    
            temák ƛópštáˑt sv to be kneeling                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         431                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          táˑt sv to be yellow; to be green (pl táttaˑt)                            
                                                                                    
           hišláwš táˑt n yellow fever                                              
                                                                                    
           icktattá·t n meadowlark (var. šokšó·š icktattá·t)                        
                                                                                    
           kocnán tá·t n copper; brass                                              
                                                                                    
            kocnán táˑt išóˑl n brass nail                                          
                                                                                    
           kú tá·t n egg yolk                                                       
                                                                                    
           néš wáš táˑt sv to be brown                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           nétatta·t n orange                                                       
                                                                                    
            nétatta·t néš n orange tree                                             
                                                                                    
           óŋ táˑt sv to be grass-green                                             
                                                                                    
           ta·tkóp sv to be light yellow                                            
                                                                                    
          táy sv to be straight (pl táytay)                                         
                                                                                    
           táyka adv directly                                                       
                                                                                    
          táy n river; bayou                                                        
                                                                                    
           cók táy n Bayou Dinde                                                    
                                                                                    
           inkilíš táy n English Bayou                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kátkošyók táy n Calcasieu River                                          
                                                                                    
           kúy [táy] n Bayou des Gayes (now Bayou Guy)                              
                                                                                    
           océh táy n Serpent Bayou                                                 
                                                                                    
           táy hatwá·lš n bridge                                                    
                                                                                    
           táyhéc n Mississippi River                                               
                                                                                    
           táy hicón n irrigation ditch                                             
                                                                                    
           táy hokinúl n fork in a river                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         432                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           táyip adv in the river                                                   
                                                                                    
            táyip néˑ n river island                                                
                                                                                    
           táy išóˑl n brook                                                        
                                                                                    
           táykópkíš n woman’s proper name                                          
                                                                                    
           táy kóš n bend in a river                                                
                                                                                    
           táy kúc n Red River                                                      
                                                                                    
           táy mé·l n Bayou Noir (now Black Bayou)                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           táy óˑš n riverbank (var. táy óˑši)                                      
                                                                                    
           táy úc n point of land at the bend of a river                            
                                                                                    
          tayóc n witch hazel (??)                                                  
                                                                                    
           tayóc tikáw n black pepper                                               
                                                                                    
          táyš sv to be strange                                                     
                                                                                    
          téˑ n leaves                                                              
                                                                                    
           hiláŋ teˑ néš n magnolia tree                                            
                                                                                    
           šiwát teˑ néš n prickly ash tree                                         
                                                                                    
          té n bow (made of hickory)                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           néš té n wooden bow                                                      
                                                                                    
           té óˑ n bowstring                                                        
                                                                                    
          tehóp n hole                                                              
                                                                                    
           kawkáw tehóp n well                                                      
                                                                                    
           tehóp máŋ n tube                                                         
                                                                                    
          tekó n barrel                                                             
                                                                                    
          téktekš sv to be speckled                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         433                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           šámš téktekš n ocelot (?)                                                
                                                                                    
          télš tv to unfold something (sg)                                          
                                                                                    
           téltelš tv to unfold something (pl)                                      
                                                                                    
          téłk n flower                                                             
                                                                                    
           téłk iv to flower                                                        
                                                                                    
           áyip téłk tálkop n marsh lily                                            
                                                                                    
           téłk kakók tímkin n rose                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           téłk lák n sunflower (loan translation from English)                     
                                                                                    
           téłk néš n flowering tree; gardenia                                      
                                                                                    
          tém adv yesterday                                                         
                                                                                    
          temák n knee                                                              
                                                                                    
           temakéŋš n kneecap                                                       
                                                                                    
           temák ƛópš sv to kneel down                                              
                                                                                    
            temák ƛópštáˑt sv to be kneeling                                        
                                                                                    
          témokš n goose                                                            
                                                                                    
          témom n ashes                                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          téns n nephew                                                             
                                                                                    
           tensá n niece                                                            
                                                                                    
          téŋ n dusk                                                                
                                                                                    
           téŋš adv in the evening                                                  
                                                                                    
           téŋwošwóšin n screech owl                                                
                                                                                    
          tépuk n peach                                                             
                                                                                    
           tépuk nékin n July                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         434                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           tépukkúckuc n plum                                                       
                                                                                    
            tépukkúckuc nékin n June (?)                                            
                                                                                    
           tépuk šó tikáw n almond                                                  
                                                                                    
          téˑš n hair of the head                                                   
                                                                                    
           té·š máŋmaŋ sv to have long hair                                         
                                                                                    
           té·š mókmok sv to have short hair                                        
                                                                                    
           té·š táytay sv to have straight hair                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           té·š wúlwul sv to have curly hair                                        
                                                                                    
          téw n tail                                                                
                                                                                    
           téw kamkám n tail fins                                                   
                                                                                    
           téw náw n tail feathers                                                  
                                                                                    
          téw n above; upstream                                                     
                                                                                    
           téwike adv from upstream                                                 
                                                                                    
           téw iv to be upstream                                                    
                                                                                    
           túl téw n Lake Charles                                                   
                                                                                    
          téwaš n leaves (sg wáš)                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          téwtew n rice                                                             
                                                                                    
          téy n vine                                                                
                                                                                    
           áliŋ hicóm téy n vine of small grapes                                    
                                                                                    
           hiláŋ wóˑl téy n muscadine vine                                          
                                                                                    
          teyóh n box; chest; trunk                                                 
                                                                                    
           teyòh koliláwine n match box                                             
                                                                                    
           tíl teyòh yámne n strap for a trunk                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         435                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          tíc iv to begin                                                           
                                                                                    
           ákmalštíc n autumn; fall season                                          
                                                                                    
          tíht sv to be lying down (sg) (pl. yóht)                                  
                                                                                    
          tík n arrow                                                               
                                                                                    
           tikišáˑt n arrowhead                                                     
                                                                                    
            kocnán tikišáˑt n iron arrowhead                                        
                                                                                    
           tikišó·m n bullet                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           tikpúns n blowgun                                                        
                                                                                    
           tikšakkáwne n quiver                                                     
                                                                                    
          tík adv until                                                             
                                                                                    
          tikáw iv to be similar (var. tukáw)                                       
                                                                                    
           kušmé·l tikáw n monkey (pl. kušmé·l šaktikáw)                            
                                                                                    
           cámakuc tikáw n shrimp                                                   
                                                                                    
           tayóc tikáw n black pepper                                               
                                                                                    
           tépuk šó tikáw n almond                                                  
                                                                                    
          tíl n leather; animal skin                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           anhipón tíl n rabbit skin                                                
                                                                                    
           láns tíl n buckskin                                                      
                                                                                    
           šokón tíl n cowhide                                                      
                                                                                    
           tíl hatkáyišne n belt                                                    
                                                                                    
           tíl hatyámne n belt                                                      
                                                                                    
           tíl teyòh yámne n strap for a trunk                                      
                                                                                    
          tím n picket                                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         436                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kakók tím n picket fence; garden                                         
                                                                                    
           téłk kakók tímkin n rose                                                 
                                                                                    
          tím iv to emit light                                                      
                                                                                    
           éŋtimnán n candle (var. éŋtímne)                                         
                                                                                    
          tímka adv often                                                           
                                                                                    
          tíns n gall; bile                                                         
                                                                                    
          tíš iv to go (sg) (pl. tíw)                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          tišá·t n brain                                                            
                                                                                    
          tíw tv to broil something                                                 
                                                                                    
           áˑl tíw n broiled meat (traditionally on a scaffold)                     
                                                                                    
            áˑl tíwne n gridiron                                                    
                                                                                    
          tíw adv heavily; strongly, of natural phenomena                           
                                                                                    
           tíwhc adv gently, weakly, of natural phenomena                           
                                                                                    
          tiwéˑ tv to be with someone                                               
                                                                                    
          tó iv there is; there are                                                 
                                                                                    
          tóˑc tv to suck something                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kattóˑc tv to kiss someone                                               
                                                                                    
            kattóˑc n a kiss                                                        
                                                                                    
           tó·c n̥ túlš tv to suck something out                                    
                                                                                    
           tóctoˑc tv to suck something repeatedly                                  
                                                                                    
          toc                                                                       
                                                                                    
           tockoyhéw n mockingbird                                                  
                                                                                    
          tóh iv to sit; to dwell (pl) (sg kéˑt)                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         437                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          tóhi tv to get into something, as a vehicle                               
                                                                                    
          tóhinak conj therefore                                                    
                                                                                    
          tók sv to be dull; not to be sharp (pl. tóktok)                           
                                                                                    
          tókiš tv to bend something                                                
                                                                                    
          tókiciˑt n grasshopper                                                    
                                                                                    
          tókš iv to be round; to be globular (pl. tóktokš)                         
                                                                                    
           tókš n round piece; round chunk                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            okišó·m tókš n spool                                                    
                                                                                    
            šoktókš n ball                                                          
                                                                                    
           tóttokš n woman’s personal name; Delilah (var. tóktokš)                  
                                                                                    
           tókš tv to wrap something                                                
                                                                                    
          tól n end                                                                 
                                                                                    
           tolhópš n needle                                                         
                                                                                    
           tolkimákiš n pin                                                         
                                                                                    
            tolkimákiš héc n breast pin                                             
                                                                                    
          tó·l n anus                                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          tól n east (directional case tólpot)                                      
                                                                                    
           tólpot inó pp on the east side of                                        
                                                                                    
          tól sv to be good (pl tóltol)                                             
                                                                                    
           tólháh sv to be unwell                                                   
                                                                                    
           tól intj all right!                                                      
                                                                                    
           šoktól n luck                                                            
                                                                                    
           tóliš tv to be good to someone                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         438                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           tólka adv well                                                           
                                                                                    
           himáŋtol ití n perfume                                                   
                                                                                    
           paytóluš sv to be generous (pl. paytoltóluš)                             
                                                                                    
          tólš sv to be domesticated (pl tóltolš)                                   
                                                                                    
          tópiš n acorn                                                             
                                                                                    
           tópiš néš n oak                                                          
                                                                                    
          tóˑt sv to be soft; silken                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           náw tóˑt n down feathers                                                 
                                                                                    
           kíštóˑt n woman’s personal name                                          
                                                                                    
          totayháhš adv in vain                                                     
                                                                                    
          totó·š n penis                                                            
                                                                                    
          town̥ táwm̥ adv sometimes                                                 
                                                                                    
          tú n river cane                                                           
                                                                                    
           néškoltu n sugar cane                                                    
                                                                                    
            neškoltú líline n sugar press                                           
                                                                                    
           tú áy n canebrake                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           tú išó·mš n narrow length of cane used for arrow shafts                  
                                                                                    
          tú n boat; canoe                                                          
                                                                                    
           tú hicón n canoe                                                         
                                                                                    
           tú kémšne n rowboat                                                      
                                                                                    
           tupóˑpwáŋ n steamboat (var. tupóhipwáŋ)                                  
                                                                                    
           túšiˑl n schooner                                                        
                                                                                    
          túc n lower leg                                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         439                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           túcci n shin bone and ankle                                              
                                                                                    
           túc héw n centipede                                                      
                                                                                    
           túc nál calf of leg; tendon or ligament of foot                          
                                                                                    
           túc komá·l n calf of leg                                                 
                                                                                    
           túc wá n bone marrow                                                     
                                                                                    
          túhuhc iv to trot                                                         
                                                                                    
          túk tv to bring                                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          túl n lake; ocean                                                         
                                                                                    
           túl héc n Lake Calcasieu; ocean                                          
                                                                                    
           túl káš iv for the tide to be high                                       
                                                                                    
           túl ná·l iv for the tide to be low                                       
                                                                                    
           túl téw n Lake Charles                                                   
                                                                                    
           túl wálš n waves                                                         
                                                                                    
            túl wálš iv for there to be waves                                       
                                                                                    
              túl wálšnakwálš iv for there to be large waves                        
                                                                                    
           yukhíti túl n Lake Prien                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          tút pp before                                                             
                                                                                    
           ilú tút n spring season                                                  
                                                                                    
           yíl tútnan adv before dawn                                               
                                                                                    
          tút n cypress                                                             
                                                                                    
           tút áy n cypress swamp                                                   
                                                                                    
                                          ƛ                                         
                                                                                    
          ƛá n mosquito                                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         440                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ƛákš sv to be dirty (pl. ƛáƛƛakš)                                         
                                                                                    
          ƛákiš n greenbriar                                                        
                                                                                    
          ƛáw sv light in weight                                                    
                                                                                    
           ƛáwnakƛáw sv to be very light in weight                                  
                                                                                    
          ƛém iv to be torn (pl. ƛemƛém)                                            
                                                                                    
           ƛém tv to tear something                                                 
                                                                                    
          ƛók iv to boil                                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ƛóˑkš iv to be turbid, roily, muddy                                       
                                                                                    
           úšƛóˑkš iv to be really muddy                                            
                                                                                    
          ƛómš tv to spill something; to throw away a group of objects (var. ƛómiš) 
                                                                                    
          ƛóp tv to stick something in                                              
                                                                                    
           néš ƛopne n post                                                         
                                                                                    
           ƛópiš tv to stick something into something (var. ƛópš)                   
                                                                                    
            kúšnak šakƛópšne n spurs                                                
                                                                                    
            temák ƛópš sv to kneel down                                             
                                                                                    
              temák ƛópštá·t sv to kneel                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           šokƛopyáhne n fork                                                       
                                                                                    
          ƛót n elevated                                                            
                                                                                    
           néˑƛót n an elevated piece of ground                                     
                                                                                    
          ƛúkš iv to smoke tobacco                                                  
                                                                                    
           cít ƛúkšne tobacco pipe                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          U                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         441                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          úc n nose; point                                                          
                                                                                    
           áŋkat mók ucúc ka n pointed window (pl áŋkat mokmók ucúc ka)             
                                                                                    
           katúc n bill of a bird                                                   
                                                                                    
           kocnán úc n point of a knife                                             
                                                                                    
           táy úc n point of land at the bend of a river                            
                                                                                    
           úc hathópš iv to pierce one’s nose                                       
                                                                                    
           úc kathópš n nostril                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           úckin hatkómš n nose ring                                                
                                                                                    
          úc sv to sneeze                                                           
                                                                                    
          uckáwš tv to cover something over                                         
                                                                                    
          úhc tv to know; to know how to; to be able to (neg. áwš)                  
                                                                                    
           hatúhc tv to remember something                                          
                                                                                    
           šokúhc sv to be intelligent; smart                                       
                                                                                    
           *úhciš to cause to know                                                  
                                                                                    
             hatúhciš iv to learn                                                   
                                                                                    
             šokwán šakúciš n interpreter                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          úk n shell; oyster                                                        
                                                                                    
          úk n ulcer; boil                                                          
                                                                                    
           ukišó·m n pimple                                                         
                                                                                    
          ukáˑk n spring of water                                                   
                                                                                    
          úš n body                                                                 
                                                                                    
          úš iv to be true; real; genuine; to be truly; to be so                    
                                                                                    
           paytóluš sv to be generous (pl. paytoltóluš)                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         442                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           úšcá·t iv to be really moving quickly                                    
                                                                                    
           úšháh iv not to be very much                                             
                                                                                    
           úšƛóˑkš iv to be really muddy                                            
                                                                                    
          úš sv to be purple (pl. úšuš)                                             
                                                                                    
           úš ináha sv to be gray                                                   
                                                                                    
                                         W                                          
                                                                                    
          wáhi tv to order someone                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          wáhuš tv to call someone (by name)                                        
                                                                                    
          wáhš n uncle                                                              
                                                                                    
          wá·k n pestle                                                             
                                                                                    
           cóhoc wá·k n ear of corn                                                 
                                                                                    
            cóhoc wa·kcí n corncob                                                  
                                                                                    
           néšpá wáˑk n wooden pestle                                               
                                                                                    
           pá wáˑk n pestle                                                         
                                                                                    
           wáypá wáˑk n stone pestle                                                
                                                                                    
          wák tv to roast something (pl. wákwak)                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           áˑl wák n roasted meat (traditionally on a rope or cord)                 
                                                                                    
            áˑl wákne n meat roaster                                                
                                                                                    
          wákpuh n grasshopper                                                      
                                                                                    
          wakpúh iv to hail                                                         
                                                                                    
          wákwakš sv to be ridgy, corrugated, striped                               
                                                                                    
          wáˑl n bedstead; floor; wall; ceiling                                     
                                                                                    
           áŋ wáˑl n house-wall                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         443                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           táy hatwá·lš n bridge                                                    
                                                                                    
           wáˑlšti n bridge                                                         
                                                                                    
          wálš tv to fan someone                                                    
                                                                                    
          wálwal n butterfly                                                        
                                                                                    
          walwálš sv to be mottled; to be wavy                                      
                                                                                    
          walwálš iv to wave back and forth; flutter                                
                                                                                    
          wán iv to say; to speak                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           šokwán n conversation                                                    
                                                                                    
            šokwán šakúciš n interpreter                                            
                                                                                    
          wánc tv to say something to someone; to tell something to someone; to tell a story to
                                                                                    
          wáŋ iv to go about                                                        
                                                                                    
           išá·k wáŋ n traveler                                                     
                                                                                    
           i·twáŋ v to lead                                                         
                                                                                    
           ítiwáŋ iv to govern; to act as a chief                                   
                                                                                    
           wáŋiš tv to drive something                                              
                                                                                    
           wáŋne n road                                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            móˑmwáŋne n molehill                                                    
                                                                                    
            néš wáŋne n footbridge                                                  
                                                                                    
            nuŋúš wáŋne n street                                                    
                                                                                    
          wáŋ sv to be alive                                                        
                                                                                    
          wáŋš n warrior                                                            
                                                                                    
          wáš n leaf (pl. téwaš)                                                    
                                                                                    
           wáš iškám n cabbage                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         444                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            wáš iškám wíˑl n turnip                                                 
                                                                                    
           néš tewáš máŋmaŋ n magnolia                                              
                                                                                    
          wáš tv to command someone to do something                                 
                                                                                    
          wáši sv to be old (pl. wašwáši)                                           
                                                                                    
           išaˑk wáši n old man (pl. išaˑk wašwáši)                                 
                                                                                    
            išaˑk wáši šokák n old men’s dance                                      
                                                                                    
           kíš ikunyúc wáši n unmarried woman                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           šakwáši n husband (loan translation from French vieux)                   
                                                                                    
           wašwáši púm n old men’s dance                                            
                                                                                    
           wášiŋ sv to be so old (pl. wašwášiŋ)                                     
                                                                                    
            wášiŋnakwášiŋ sv to be very old                                         
                                                                                    
          wát n ash tree                                                            
                                                                                    
          wáwš n steam                                                              
                                                                                    
          wáy n stone                                                               
                                                                                    
           néˑway n brick                                                           
                                                                                    
            néˑwayáŋ n brick house                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           wayáŋ n stone house                                                      
                                                                                    
           wáy cíˑci n stone pipe                                                   
                                                                                    
           wáy kócnan n stone knife                                                 
                                                                                    
           wáypá n stone mortar                                                     
                                                                                    
            wáypá wáˑk n stone pestle                                               
                                                                                    
           wáy píš hópšne n stone borer                                             
                                                                                    
           wáy šíht n stone jug                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         445                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          wáy intj ouch!                                                            
                                                                                    
          wéhet pro to me (var wéˑt)                                                
                                                                                    
          wéht n ribs                                                               
                                                                                    
          wéˑt n woman’s sister or cousin                                           
                                                                                    
          wewéwš tv to bark at something                                            
                                                                                    
          wí pro I                                                                  
                                                                                    
           wi poss my                                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           wi núk pro myself                                                        
                                                                                    
           wéhet pro to me (var wéˑt)                                               
                                                                                    
          wíˑl n root                                                               
                                                                                    
          wiló iv to fall (pl) (sg. makáw)                                          
                                                                                    
          wilwíliš tv to rock something                                             
                                                                                    
           šakitéwkáwine hatwilwílšne n rocking chair                               
                                                                                    
           wilwílišne n cradle                                                      
                                                                                    
          winéˑ tv to find something                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          wiškáhš                                                                   
                                                                                    
           kóy hatwiškáhš sv to talk too much                                       
                                                                                    
          wiskicíto n Whiskey Chitto Bayou < Choctaw oski čito ‘Great Canebrake’ (cf. Koasati
                                                                                    
           wiskicitó)                                                               
                                                                                    
          wíw tv to believe something                                               
                                                                                    
          wóˑl n eye; small fruit                                                   
                                                                                    
           hiláŋ wóˑl n muscadine fruit                                             
                                                                                    
            hiláŋ wóˑl téy n muscadine vine                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         446                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           wóˑl hathúne n spectacles                                                
                                                                                    
           wóˑlhópš iškám n big-eye sifting basket (loan translation from Koasati tiłcobá)
                                                                                    
           wóˑl kimáti n eyeball                                                    
                                                                                    
           wóˑl kišáŋ n eyelid; eyelash                                             
                                                                                    
            wóˑl kišáŋ né n lower eyelid                                            
                                                                                    
            wóˑl kišáŋ óci n upper eyelid                                           
                                                                                    
           wóˑl náw n eyebrow                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           wóˑl páˑš n eyelid                                                       
                                                                                    
          wolipáw iv to whirl around                                                
                                                                                    
          wolkánc n ladder                                                          
                                                                                    
          wolšél n great horned owl                                                 
                                                                                    
          wólwoˑl iv to be curly                                                    
                                                                                    
          wón n dew                                                                 
                                                                                    
              iv to be dewy                                                         
                                                                                    
          wóš n hand                                                                
                                                                                    
           išaˑk wóš kócti n left-handed man                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           išaˑk wóš tól n right-handed man                                         
                                                                                    
           wóškáwš n thimble                                                        
                                                                                    
           wóš cúh n fingernail                                                     
                                                                                    
           wóš hál n back of the hand (var. wóš óc)                                 
                                                                                    
           wóš haccámšne n hand towel                                               
                                                                                    
           wóš hatkolkó·lš iv to rub one’s hands                                    
                                                                                    
           wóš hatkómš n glove                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         447                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           wóš hatpániš iv to clasp one’s hands                                     
                                                                                    
           wóš hatwóy iv to rub one’s hands                                         
                                                                                    
           wóš héc n thumb                                                          
                                                                                    
           wóšišóˑl n little finger                                                 
                                                                                    
            wóšišóˑlháˑn n nine                                                     
                                                                                    
              wóšišóˑlháˑnip adv nine times                                         
                                                                                    
           wóšíˑt n index finger                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           wóš kimát n palm of the hand                                             
                                                                                    
           wóš kimáti n middle finger                                               
                                                                                    
            wóš kimáti hicón n ring finger                                          
                                                                                    
           wóš mák n fist                                                           
                                                                                    
           wóšnák n index finger                                                    
                                                                                    
           wóš óc n back of the hand (var. wóš hál)                                 
                                                                                    
          wóš iv to hiss; to screech                                                
                                                                                    
           téŋwošwóšin n screech owl                                                
                                                                                    
          wóšim n whistling sound                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           wóšimyók iv to whistle                                                   
                                                                                    
          wóšiŋ iv to be naked                                                      
                                                                                    
          wošóš sv to be in a hurry                                                 
                                                                                    
          wošpé n ten                                                               
                                                                                    
           wošpé cíˑk n twenty                                                      
                                                                                    
            wošpé cíˑkip adv twenty times (var. wošpéip cíˑkip)                     
                                                                                    
            wošpé cíˑk hál tanúk n twenty-one                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         448                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           wošpé hal cí·k n twelve (var. wošpé hacíˑk)                              
                                                                                    
           wošpé hál himatól n fourteen (var. wošpé hahimatól)                      
                                                                                    
           wošpé hál himatólcík n eighteen (var. wošpé hahimatólcík)                
                                                                                    
           wošpé hál laccík n sixteen (var. wošpé halaccík)                         
                                                                                    
           wošpé hál lá·t n thirteen (var. wošpé halá·t)                            
                                                                                    
           wošpé hál ní·t n fifteen                                                 
                                                                                    
           wošpé hál páhw n eighteen (var. wošpé hapáhw)                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           wošpé hál tanúk n eleven (var. wošpé hatanúk)                            
                                                                                    
             wošpé hatanúkip adv eleven times                                       
                                                                                    
           wošpé hál wošišolháˑn n nineteen (var. wošpé hawošišolháˑn)              
                                                                                    
           wošpé himatól n forty                                                    
                                                                                    
           wošpé himatólcíˑk n eighty                                               
                                                                                    
           wošpéip adv ten times                                                    
                                                                                    
            wošpéip hatanúkip adv eleven times                                      
                                                                                    
            wošpéip hacíˑkip adv twelve times                                       
                                                                                    
           wošpé laccíˑk n sixty                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           wošpé lá·t n thirty                                                      
                                                                                    
            wošpé lá·tip adv thirty times                                           
                                                                                    
           wošpé ní·t n fifty                                                       
                                                                                    
            wošpé ní·tip adv fifty times                                            
                                                                                    
           wošpé páhw n seventy                                                     
                                                                                    
           wošpéšim iv to be ten apiece; ten to each                                
                                                                                    
          wóy tv to rub something                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         449                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          wuláktakš n kidneys                                                       
                                                                                    
          wulipáw iv to whirl around                                                
                                                                                    
          wúlkol n raccoon                                                          
                                                                                    
                                          Y                                         
                                                                                    
          yá·mš tv to gather something of food                                      
                                                                                    
          yá deic that                                                              
                                                                                    
           yá n that person; that thing                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           yatán iv to be the same                                                  
                                                                                    
          yáh tv to eat something                                                   
                                                                                    
           yáhne n eater                                                            
                                                                                    
            cóhoc yáhne n corn borer; corn weevil                                   
                                                                                    
            šakitúlyahne n table (var. šakitúlyahnan)                               
                                                                                    
           šokyáh iv to eat                                                         
                                                                                    
            šokyáh n eater                                                          
                                                                                    
            šokyahnán n food                                                        
                                                                                    
           šokƛopyáhne n fork                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          yáhc n fanning basket                                                     
                                                                                    
          yakéˑš tv to seal something                                               
                                                                                    
          yál tv to take something; to take something in one’s arms; to arrest someone
                                                                                    
           hokyál iv to marry                                                       
                                                                                    
          yám tv to tie something around something                                  
                                                                                    
           tíl hatyámne n belt                                                      
                                                                                    
           tíl teyòh yámne n strap for a trunk                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         450                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           yamyám tv to tie something around something repeatedly                   
                                                                                    
          yá·n n chopique fish; bowfin                                              
                                                                                    
          yanyáns tv to fear someone (var. yanyán)                                  
                                                                                    
           hatyanyáns iv to be afraid; to be wild                                   
                                                                                    
          yáŋ sv to be dark green                                                   
                                                                                    
           óŋ yáŋ sv to be grass green                                              
                                                                                    
          *yapúh tv to spear something                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            yapúhne n spear                                                         
                                                                                    
          yášk tv to moisten something                                              
                                                                                    
          yáw n fish                                                                
                                                                                    
           kómok yáw šakináwšne n fishing basket (var. kómok yáw šakkáwne)          
                                                                                    
           yáwláklá·k n gaspergou fish; drum fish (var. yáw á·l lákla·k)            
                                                                                    
           yáwpúm n  mullet fish                                                    
                                                                                    
          yáw tv to watch something; to guard something                             
                                                                                    
           áŋlá·kyáw n jailor; sheriff                                              
                                                                                    
          yáw tv to wait for something; to expect something                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          yéw n sand                                                                
                                                                                    
          yíkiš tv to pay someone                                                   
                                                                                    
          yíkš tv to buy something                                                  
                                                                                    
           šakí·kš iv to buy                                                        
                                                                                    
           šokšakyíkš n merchant (var. šokšakí·kš)                                  
                                                                                    
           šokšakyíkšáŋ n storehouse; store                                         
                                                                                    
           yíkšhiwéw iv to be expensive                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         451                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          yíl n day                                                                 
                                                                                    
           sámedi yíl n Saturday (< French samedi)                                  
                                                                                    
           yílhiwéw n Sunday; week                                                  
                                                                                    
            yilhiwéw héc n holiday                                                  
                                                                                    
              inkilíš yilhiwéw héc n Christmas                                      
                                                                                    
              kiwílš yilhiwéw héc n New Year’s Day                                  
                                                                                    
            yilhiwéwéŋ n Mardi Gras                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            yilhiwéw yíl n Sunday                                                   
                                                                                    
            yilhiwéw pétik yíl n Monday                                             
                                                                                    
           yílkit mo·n adv every day                                                
                                                                                    
           yíl tútnan adv before dawn                                               
                                                                                    
          yíl iv to shine                                                           
                                                                                    
           yíliš tv to make shine; to light something                               
                                                                                    
          yíln̥ adv tomorrow                                                        
                                                                                    
          yilkánmun n post oak                                                      
                                                                                    
           yilkánmun néš n post oak tree                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          yílke iv to marry                                                         
                                                                                    
          yilwáy tv to marry someone                                                
                                                                                    
          yimóŋ sv to be cheap                                                      
                                                                                    
          yimyílš iv for there to be lightning                                      
                                                                                    
           yimyílš n lightning                                                      
                                                                                    
          yínc tv to wrap something                                                 
                                                                                    
           cít wošyínc n cigar; cigarette                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         452                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           išaˑthatyíncne n crown                                                   
                                                                                    
          yó·c                                                                      
                                                                                    
           yóˑckéˑt iv to squat                                                     
                                                                                    
          yóht iv to be lying down (pl) (sg. tíht)                                  
                                                                                    
          yók tv to sing something                                                  
                                                                                    
           wóšimyók iv to whistle                                                   
                                                                                    
           yokón n song                                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          yóˑl iv to be ill-tempered                                                
                                                                                    
          yón n someone with evil supernatural power                                
                                                                                    
           išaˑkyón n wizard                                                        
                                                                                    
           kíšyón n witch                                                           
                                                                                    
          yóŋ iv to sting (var. yóŋš)                                               
                                                                                    
           koyíw šakyóŋš n whooping cough                                           
                                                                                    
           míŋ šakyóŋ n wasp                                                        
                                                                                    
           canúk šakyóŋš n horsefly                                                 
                                                                                    
          yóŋš tv to call someone by a name                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          yóŋš tv to beg of someone                                                 
                                                                                    
           šokšakyóŋš iv to beg                                                     
                                                                                    
            šokšakyóŋ n beggar                                                      
                                                                                    
          yoyót n woman’s personal name                                             
                                                                                    
          yúc sv to grow (animate) (pl yúcyuc)                                      
                                                                                    
          yúc sv to be grown (said of people and plants)                            
                                                                                    
           hiyó·l yúc n elder son                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         453                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kíšyúc n will-o’-the-wisp; woman’s personal name                         
                                                                                    
          yukhíti n Indian; Atakapa                                                 
                                                                                    
           yukhíti išá·k n the Atakapa people                                       
                                                                                    
           yukhíti ká phr Indian-made                                               
                                                                                    
           yukhíti kónan n duck potato (Sagittaria lancifolia)                      
                                                                                    
           yukhíti kóy iv to speak Atakapa                                          
                                                                                    
            yukhíti kóy n the Atakapa language                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           yukhíti túl n Lake Prien                                                 
                                                                                    
          yukít n pro we                                                            
                                                                                    
          yúlš tv to draw something; to write something; to mark something          
                                                                                    
           iwéw šakyúlš n portrait                                                  
                                                                                    
           néš šokyúlšne n pencil                                                   
                                                                                    
           šakyúlš n letter; writing; debt                                          
                                                                                    
            šakyúlš kéš iv to post a letter                                         
                                                                                    
            šakyúlš kóŋ sv to receive a letter                                      
                                                                                    
           šokyúlš n letter; writing                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            šokyúlš hatúhciš áŋ n school                                            
                                                                                    
            šokyúlš hipón n book                                                    
                                                                                    
            šokyúlšne n pen; pencil                                                 
                                                                                    
           yúlš n word; writing; mark                                               
                                                                                    
          yúl sv to be marked; spotted; striped (pl yúlyul)                         
                                                                                    
           yúl hokicóyš adv having stripes crossing each other                      
                                                                                    
           yúl kihipáhšot adv striped horizontally                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         454                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           náw kokkop yúlyul n striped stockings                                    
                                                                                    
           šokónyúl n spotted ox (pl. šokónyúlyul)                                  
                                                                                    
           yúl máŋš n line (pl yúl máŋmaŋš)                                         
                                                                                    
          A note on the semantics of certain words. While the glosses provided for the majority of
                                                                                    
          Atakapa words by Gatschet are straightforward, there are a handful of words whose meanings
                                                                                    
          seem not to have been correctly recorded. The word nohámš áyip ‘gallinule’ which is glossed
                                                                                    
          ‘turkey’ has been noted above in the discussion of Text 1 in Chapter 5. The word míŋ áŋšakhópš
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          is glossed ‘bumblebee;’ however, the literal meaning ‘bee making holes in the house’ suggests
                                                                                    
          rather the carpenter bee. The animal name šá·kš is glossed only by the Louisiana French pichou
                                                                                    
          (itself a loan from Micmac), which usually means ‘bobcat.’ However, niyá·l is given as wildcat
                                                                                    
          (a direct translation of Louisiana French chat sauvage ‘bobcat’) and in one place in the field
                                                                                    
          notes it is asserted that the niyá·l is not a pichou. In a third place ša·kš (written shā́ks) is glossed
                                                                                    
          ‘fox.’ The latter meaning is the one accepted here, even though ‘fox’ is reynard in Louisiana
                                                                                    
          French, not pichou, and there is no attested word for ‘cougar,’ which would otherwise seem the
                                                                                    
          most likely candidate.                                                    
                                                                                    
               The tribal name nóhay is glossed ‘Alabama Indian’ by Gatschet, but then the loan word
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          alpamú is also glossed ‘Alabama Indian.’ The Koasati were the principal Indian group who lived
                                                                                    
          near the Atakapa, and there are clear connections between the two peoples. Although there were
                                                                                    
          always a few Alabama living among the Koasati, they did not form a major portion of the
                                                                                    
          population. Thus given the presence of the loan word alpamú, it is most likely that nóhay refers
                                                                                    
          to the Koasati. Gatschet gives a tentative etymology of nóhay as náwóh áy ‘chinquapin swamp
                                                                                    
          person.’ Given that the chinquapin is a tree that grows on hills or sandy ridges, never in swamps,
                                                                                    
          one must reject this as a false etymology, and accept that the word has no known source.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         455                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Another word of uncertain meaning is ištóhš glossed by Gatschet as ‘mulatto.’ A special
                                                                                    
          term for a person of mixed race is highly suspect, given that the Atakapa lacked the American
                                                                                    
          preoccupation with race. The nearby Koasati never developed a term for ‘mulatto’ in their
                                                                                    
          language, so it would be highly unlikely that the Atakapa did. It seems more likely that ištóhš is
                                                                                    
          a tribal name that Gatschet completely misunderstood.                     
                                                                                    
               Finally, the word kíwilš for ‘Frenchman, white man, master,’ is derived by Swanton from
                                                                                    
          the French word creole, which in French specifically refers to a person of Old-World origin
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          regardless of race. The semantics of the Yukhíti word have been influenced by Chitimacha,
                                                                                    
          where the word ka·nuš means ‘white person; master.’(Swadesh 1950b:78) and ka·nuš niki (‘real’)
                                                                                    
          means ‘Frenchman.’ The latter form is strikingly similar to Tonkawa ka·nos ‘Mexican’
                                                                                    
          (Hoijer:1949:38) and Caddo ka·nuš ‘Frenchman’ (Chafe,2018:233), and suggests a wide-spread
                                                                                    
          loan. In most other Southeastern languages, the word for ‘Frenchman’ is a borrowing from
                                                                                    
          français (e.g. Koasati falancí). It seems unlikely that the Atakapa form is a borrowing from
                                                                                    
          French, as creole should give something like *kiliyó·l not the attested kíwilš. Therefore, the
                                                                                    
          source of the word cannot be determined at present.                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         456                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          APPENDIX I                                                                
                                                                                    
                          Hiyékiti (Eastern Atakapa) - English Vocabulary           
                                                                                    
           The source for the vocabulary is Manuscript 1627, National Anthropological Archives,
                                                                                    
          Smithsonian Institution, pp. 195-201. This is a 19th century copy of the vocabulary collected by
                                                                                    
          Martin Duralde 23 April 1802. The reconstructed word and definition is followed by the original
                                                                                    
          manuscript form. Phrases and sentences are placed in italics under the headword; Hiyékiti words
                                                                                    
          remembered by Kišyuc have her forms marked by (K.). Forms with G. in square brackets are
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          lacking in the manuscript and are taken from Gallatin (1836). The forms found in Gallatin have to
                                                                                    
          be used with extreme caution, as there are many letter substitutions (w for u or ou), misreadings (t
                                                                                    
          for l, h for k) and letter turnings (n for u, u for n). A very few forms found in Gallatin and not in
                                                                                    
          the manuscript are so garbled that the phonetic form cannot be reconstructed.
                                                                                    
                                          A                                         
                                                                                    
          a pro he; she (a)                                                         
                                                                                    
           a okhe ‘He came.’ (a okghè)                                              
                                                                                    
          ak n water (ak [G.])                                                      
                                                                                    
          ako iv to be wet (aghô)                                                   
                                                                                    
                             ͡                                                      
          akonstoš n river (acōnstouche)                                            
                                                                                    
          akonska· n stream (rivulet) (acōnskaa) (cf. ška· ‘to be small)            
                                                                                    
          aktiho·w n spring of water (aggtihōōu)                                    
                                                                                    
          aliw n heat; year; summer [G.] (alliouou)                                 
                                                                                    
           aliw hanik ‘one year’ (alliou hannigg)                                   
                                                                                    
           aliw hat ‘The heat is great.’ (alliouou hatte)                           
                                                                                    
           aliw iv to be hot (alliou)                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          457                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          am tv to drink (amm)                                                      
                                                                                    
           we· am ‘I drink.’ (ouèè amm)                                             
                                                                                    
          an n ear (ann)                                                            
                                                                                    
          aŋ n house (ank [G.])                                                     
                                                                                    
          ašat n head (ashat)                                                       
                                                                                    
          aše·p iv to be large (ascheebb)                                           
                                                                                    
           wak aše·p ‘The hail is large.’ (ouagg ascheebb)                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ateƛ adv today (ateggl)                                                   
                                                                                    
          aƛ n meat (aggld)                                                         
                                                                                    
          aƛešt n snow (adlesht)                                                    
                                                                                    
           aƛešt komn̥st ‘The snow is heavy.’ (adlesht combnst)                     
                                                                                    
           aƛešt laŋ n ice (adlescht lagn)                                          
                                                                                    
            aƛešt laŋ komn̥st ‘The ice is thick’ (adlescht lagn combnst)            
                                                                                    
          aynect n wild goose (ainetst)                                             
                                                                                    
                                          C                                         
                                                                                    
          ca n lance (tsā)                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ca·k iv to be dry (tsaak)                                                 
                                                                                    
          cams iv to be cold (tsamps) (K. cáms {tchamps})                           
                                                                                    
           kaŋ cams ‘The air is cold.’ (kang tsamps)                                
                                                                                    
           cams ka n autumn (tsampska [G.])                                         
                                                                                    
          ce·c n four (tseets)                                                      
                                                                                    
          cik n bone (tsik)                                                         
                                                                                    
          cikwiyaw n eight (tsikhouiaou)                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          458                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          cikilik n chicken (K) {tsíkilík}                                          
                                                                                    
          ciniw n skunk (tsinniou)                                                  
                                                                                    
          cit n tobacco (tsigg [G.])                                                
                                                                                    
          coks n cardinal (tsoggs)                                                  
                                                                                    
          colakst n bird (tsorlagst)                                                
                                                                                    
          contima·n n blackbird (tsounthimaan)                                      
                                                                                    
                                          E                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ehit n chin (ehitt)                                                       
                                                                                    
          e·l iv to be hard (eell)                                                  
                                                                                    
          enke·st n prairie hen (enkeestt)                                          
                                                                                    
          eŋ n fat (egnn)                                                           
                                                                                    
                                          H                                         
                                                                                    
          ha pro his; her (ha)                                                      
                                                                                    
           ha niki·l ‘his wife’ (ha nickib [G.])                                    
                                                                                    
           ha yo·l ‘her husband’ (ha iool)                                          
                                                                                    
          haha intj yes (haha)                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          halk n -teen (halg; halk)                                                 
                                                                                    
           halk hanik n eleven (halk hannik)                                        
                                                                                    
           halk hapa·lst n twelve (halk happaalst)                                  
                                                                                    
           halk la·t n thirteen (halg laat)                                         
                                                                                    
           halk ce·c n fourteen (halg tseets)                                       
                                                                                    
           halk ni·t n fifteen (halg niit)                                          
                                                                                    
           halk ta·lst n sixteen (hallg taalst)                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          459                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                     ͡                                              
           halk pahw n seventeen (hallg paghou-)                                    
                                                                                    
           halk cikwiyaw n eighteen (hallg tsikhouiaou)                             
                                                                                    
           halk teŋwiyaw n nineteen (hallg tegghouiaou)                             
                                                                                    
           halk heysiŋ n twenty (hallg heissign)                                    
                                                                                    
          ha·n intj no (haan)                                                       
                                                                                    
          hanik n one (hannigg; hannik)                                             
                                                                                    
           aliw hanik ‘one year’ (alliou hannigg)                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           i·ƛ hanik ‘one day’ (iidl hannigg)                                       
                                                                                    
           teŋi·ƛešt hanik ‘one month’ (tegg iidlesht hannigg)                      
                                                                                    
          hapa·lst n two (happaalst) (K. hápalšt {hápalsht})                        
                                                                                    
          haška· n brother (hashkaa)                                                
                                                                                    
          hat iv to be great (hatte)                                                
                                                                                    
           aliw hat ‘The heat is great.’ (alliouou hatte)                           
                                                                                    
          hate n body (hathè)                                                       
                                                                                    
          ha·w n frost (haaou)                                                      
                                                                                    
           ha·w kop ‘The frost is white.’ (haaou cobb)                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           ha·w elt n snow (haaou elt)                                              
                                                                                    
          hay iv to laugh (haî)                                                     
                                                                                    
          he iv to be bitter (hê)                                                   
                                                                                    
          hehin n -ty (hehin)                                                       
                                                                                    
           hehin ce·c n forty (hehin tseets)                                        
                                                                                    
           hehin ni·t n fifty (hehin niit)                                          
                                                                                    
           hehin ta·lst n sixty (hehin taalst)                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          460                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           hehin pahw n seventy (hehin paghô)                                       
                                                                                    
           hehin cikwiyaw n eighty (hehin tsikhouiaou)                              
                                                                                    
           hehin teŋwiyaw n ninety (hehin tegghouiaou)                              
                                                                                    
           hehin po·n n hundred (hehin poon)                                        
                                                                                    
            hehin po·n hanik halk hanik n one hundred and one (hehin poon hannik halk hannik)
                                                                                    
            hehin po·n happa·lst n two hundred (hehin poon happaalst)               
                                                                                    
            hehin po·n la·t n three hundred (hehin poon laat)                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            hehin po·n ce·c n four hundred (hehin poon tseets)                      
                                                                                    
            hehin po·n ni·t n five hundred (hehin poon niitt)                       
                                                                                    
            hehin po·n teŋwiyaw n nine hundred (hehin poon tegghouiaou)             
                                                                                    
            hehin po·n yoliš n thousand (hehin poon iolish)                         
                                                                                    
              hehin po·n yoliš hapa·lst n two thousand (hehin poon iolish happaalst)
                                                                                    
          hew iv to be many (héoù)                                                  
                                                                                    
                         ͡                                                          
           hew pro they (heou)                                                      
          heysiŋ n ten (hiissing; heissign) (Chitimacha heyčˀi)                     
                                                                                    
           heysiŋ hapa·lst n twenty (heissign happalst)                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            heysiŋ hapa·lst halk hanik n twenty-one (heissign happalst halk hannik) 
                                                                                    
            heysiŋ hapa·lst halk hapa·lst n twenty-two (heissign happalst halk happalst)
                                                                                    
           heysiŋ la·t n thirty (heissign lāat)                                     
                                                                                    
          hiw tv to see (hioû)                                                      
                                                                                    
          ho·m n mole (hooum)                                                       
                                                                                    
                                           I                                        
                                                                                    
          iclanst n deer (itstanst [G.])                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          461                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          ict n nose (idst)                                                         
                                                                                    
          ihowiƛst n lightning (ihooigglst)                                         
                                                                                    
          i·kp n blood (iiggp)                                                      
                                                                                    
          ika· iv to be bad (ickaa)                                                 
                                                                                    
          ine n face (inne)                                                         
                                                                                    
          i·ƛ n light; day (iigg’l)                                                 
                                                                                    
           i·ƛ hanik ‘one day’ (iidl hannigg)                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           i·ƛ lamlamst ‘The light dazzles’ (igg’l amlampst)                        
                                                                                    
           i·ƛ tolš ‘The day is fine.’ (iigg tolch)                                 
                                                                                    
           i·ƛa adv tomorrow (iidla)                                                
                                                                                    
          iš n star (ish) (K. íš)                                                   
                                                                                    
           iš hew ‘The stars are many.’ (ish héoù)                                  
                                                                                    
          išpe iv to be young (ishpè)                                               
                                                                                    
           niki·l išpe n girl (nickibishpe [G.])                                    
                                                                                    
          it n darkness (itt)                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          K                                         
                                                                                    
          kahak n crow (kahagg)                                                     
                                                                                    
          kak n forest (wood); tree (kagg)                                          
                                                                                    
                           ͡                                                        
          kakaw n brook (kākaou)                                                    
          kakwan n opossum (kaghùann)                                               
                                                                                    
          kala iv to be new (calla)                                                 
                                                                                    
          kam n fire (cam [G.]) (K kám {kám})                                       
                                                                                    
          kaŋ n air (kang)                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          462                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kaŋ cams ‘The air is cold.’ (kang tsamps)                                
                                                                                    
          kapkapst n thunder (kapkapst)                                             
                                                                                    
           kapkapst makasn̥ ‘The thunder is loud.’ (kapkapst maghasn)               
                                                                                    
          katkoš n eagle (catkush)                                                  
                                                                                    
          kat n mountain (katt)                                                     
                                                                                    
          kat n mouth (kat)                                                         
                                                                                    
          kato· n lip (kathoo)                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kaƛemn̥ adv yesterday (khatlebmn)                                         
                                                                                    
          kaw iv to die (kaaou)                                                     
                                                                                    
          kawkaw n rain (càucàu)                                                    
                                                                                    
           kawkaw komn̥st ‘The rain is heavy.’ (càucàu combnst)                     
                                                                                    
          kilkaw n flying squirrel (khillkaou)                                      
                                                                                    
          kiw n egg (kiou)                                                          
                                                                                    
          kišuš n cedar tree (khishoush cf. Chitimacha šuš ‘tree’)                  
                                                                                    
          kok iv to bend (kocg)                                                     
                                                                                    
          kom iv to be heavy; to be thick (combnst) (cf. Y kómi)                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           aƛešt komn̥st ‘The snow is heavy.’ (adlesht combnst)                     
                                                                                    
           aƛešt laŋ komn̥st ‘The ice is thick’ (adlescht lagn combnst)             
                                                                                    
           kawkaw komn̥st ‘The rain is heavy.’ (càucàu combnst)                     
                                                                                    
           šay komn̥st n ‘The fog is thick.’ (shŷ combnst) (glossed ‘fog’)          
                                                                                    
           won komn̥st ‘The dew is heavy.’ (ou-onn combnst)                         
                                                                                    
          kop iv to be white (cobb)                                                 
                                                                                    
           ha·w kop ‘The frost is white.’ (haaou cobb)                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          463                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kot pro this(?); that(?) (kout)                                           
                                                                                    
          koy iv to speak (koii)                                                    
                                                                                    
          koywak n neck (coyouac)                                                   
                                                                                    
                                          L                                         
                                                                                    
          lak n sky (lacg)                                                          
                                                                                    
           lak tolš ‘The sky is clear.’ (lacg tolch)                                
                                                                                    
          lakipa·ks tat n copper (lakibaagstat)                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          lalec iv to be strong (lállets)                                           
                                                                                    
          lamlamst iv to dazzle ([l]amlampst)                                       
                                                                                    
           i·ƛ lamlamst ‘The light dazzles’ (igg’l amlampst)                        
                                                                                    
          laŋ šay n cloud (laggn chy)                                               
                                                                                    
          la·t n three (laat)                                                       
                                                                                    
          leke iv to be wise (lekkè)                                                
                                                                                    
          lo·kš n prairie (looksh)                                                  
                                                                                    
                                          M                                         
                                                                                    
          makasn̥ iv to be loud (maghasn)                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kapkapst makasn̥ ‘The thunder is loud.’ (kapkapst maghasn)               
                                                                                    
          makaw iv to fall (makhaouou)                                              
                                                                                    
           ne makaw ‘It falls to the ground.’ (glossed thunderbolt) (nay makhauou)  
                                                                                    
          ma·l n thigh (maal)                                                       
                                                                                    
          mec iv to be tall (meets)                                                 
                                                                                    
          mehin iv to be weak (mè-in)                                               
                                                                                    
          mi·npanst n rainbow (miinpanst)                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          464                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          mi·nst iv to feel (miinst)                                                
                                                                                    
          mok iv to be low (mock)                                                   
                                                                                    
                                          N                                         
                                                                                    
          na·k n sun (naagg)                                                        
                                                                                    
           na·k aliw ‘The sun is hot.’ (naagg alliouou)                             
                                                                                    
          na·k pro you (pl) (nāāk)                                                  
                                                                                    
          naks tv to hear (nacks)                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          nama tv to kill (namma [G.])                                              
                                                                                    
          nat pro you (sg) (natt)                                                   
                                                                                    
          natkoy n snake (natkoi)                                                   
                                                                                    
          ne n ground (né [G.])                                                     
                                                                                    
           ne makaw ‘It falls to the ground.’ (glossed thunderbolt) (nay makhauou)  
                                                                                    
           ne ƛak n hill (neklagg)                                                  
                                                                                    
          necwopst n lynx (netswopst)                                               
                                                                                    
          nešo·wm n corn (neshooum)                                                 
                                                                                    
          nelkicon n quail (nelkitson)                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          neƛ n tongue (nedle)                                                      
                                                                                    
          ni·t n five (niit)                                                        
                                                                                    
          nik n milk (nik)                                                          
                                                                                    
          niki·l n woman; wife (nickiil)                                            
                                                                                    
           ha niki·l ‘his wife’ (ha nickib [G.])                                    
                                                                                    
           niki·l išpe n girl (nickibishpe [G.])                                    
                                                                                    
          nikict n nipple (nīkidst)                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          465                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          niks n gum (niks)                                                         
                                                                                    
          nišmi·n n pine tree (nichemiin)                                           
                                                                                    
          nok n arm (nock)                                                          
                                                                                    
                                          N̥                                        
                                                                                    
          -n̥ st suff continuative or customary action (-bnst) (cf. Y. -n̥t- continuative; -n̥st customary)
                                                                                    
           aƛešt komn̥st ‘The snow is heavy.’ (adlesht combnst)                     
                                                                                    
           aƛešt laŋ komn̥st ‘The ice is thick’ (adlescht lagn combnst)             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           kawkaw komn̥st ‘The rain is heavy.’ (càucàu combnst)                     
                                                                                    
           šay komn̥st n ‘The fog is thick.’ (shŷ combnst) (glossed ‘fog’)          
                                                                                    
           won komn̥st ‘The dew is heavy.’ (ou-onn combnst)                         
                                                                                    
                                          O                                         
                                                                                    
          oc n tooth (ods)                                                          
                                                                                    
          oc n beaver (otts)                                                        
                                                                                    
          ockaw n coward (odskahô)                                                  
                                                                                    
          o·k iv to be red (oogg)                                                   
                                                                                    
          ok iv to come (ohg)                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           a okhe ‘He came.’ (a okghè)                                              
                                                                                    
          okst n cheek (ockst)                                                      
                                                                                    
          oŋ n grass (ognn)                                                         
                                                                                    
           oŋ tattat iv to be green (onntatat [G.])                                 
                                                                                    
          oš n beard (osh)                                                          
                                                                                    
          oy iv to sleep (oi)                                                       
                                                                                    
                                          P                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          466                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          pacpac n wind (patspats) (K. pácpac {pátspats})                           
                                                                                    
                           ͡                                                        
          pahw n seven (payghou; paghou; pagho)                                     
          pa·š iv to be thin (paash)                                                
                                                                                    
          pen n sister (penn)                                                       
                                                                                    
          pih iv to dance (piggh [G.])                                              
                                                                                    
          pistaks iv to be alive (pistaggs)                                         
                                                                                    
          po· iv to be narrow (poo)                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          Š                                         
                                                                                    
          šakš n fox (shaggs)                                                       
                                                                                    
          šaw n father (shaoù) (K. šáw {shá-u})                                     
                                                                                    
          šay n smoke; fog (shŷ)                                                    
                                                                                    
           laŋ šay n cloud (laggn chy)                                              
                                                                                    
           šay komn̥st n ‘The fog is thick.’ (shŷ combnst) (glossed ‘fog’)          
                                                                                    
           šay taw ‘The smoke is bothersome (incommodes).’ (shŷ thaou)              
                                                                                    
          šemstapahan n child (shempstapahan)                                       
                                                                                    
          šilik n turkey (shilligg)                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          šiliŋ iv to be pretty (shillg)                                            
                                                                                    
          šisk iv to be sweet (shisk)                                               
                                                                                    
          šiwo·n n lake (nuouoon; shiuon [G.]) (K. šiwo·n {shiwōn})                 
                                                                                    
          ška· n son (shkaa)                                                        
                                                                                    
          ška· iv to be small (shkaa)                                               
                                                                                    
          skaw n duck (skaou)                                                       
                                                                                    
          skwene n arrow (squennè)                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          467                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          šo·t tv to love (shōt [G.])                                               
                                                                                    
          šokwa n bread (shokoa)                                                    
                                                                                    
          stiŋ n bear (stigne [G.])                                                 
                                                                                    
                                          T                                         
                                                                                    
          taheš n hair (taeesh)                                                     
                                                                                    
          takiskoyhew n mockingbird (taquiskoiheoù)                                 
                                                                                    
          ta·lst n six (taalst)                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          tal n skin (tall)                                                         
                                                                                    
          taŋ n sky (tagg [G.])                                                     
                                                                                    
          tat n belly (tat [G.])                                                    
                                                                                    
          tat iv to be yellow (tat)                                                 
                                                                                    
           lakipa·ks tat n copper (lakibaagstat)                                    
                                                                                    
           oŋ tattat iv to be green (onntatat [G.])                                 
                                                                                    
          taw  iv to be bothersome (thaou)                                          
                                                                                    
           šay taw ‘The smoke is bothersome (incommodes).’ (shŷ thaou)              
                                                                                    
          tay n poplar tree (tay)                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          temst n spring (season) (tempst [G.])                                     
                                                                                    
          teŋ n mother; (daughter?) (teg’n) (K. teŋ. {teng} She denied the meaning ‘daughter.’)
                                                                                    
          teŋ n night (tegg)                                                        
                                                                                    
           teŋ it ‘The night is dark.’ (ten ett)                                    
                                                                                    
           teŋi·ƛešt n moon; month (tegidlesht)                                     
                                                                                    
            teŋi·ƛešt hanik ‘one month’ (tegg iidlesht hannigg)                     
                                                                                    
            teŋi·ƛešt tolšt ‘The moon is bright’ (teg-idlesht tolsht)               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          468                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          teŋwiyaw n nine (tegghouiaou)                                             
                                                                                    
          tec n leg (tets)                                                          
                                                                                    
          tiksnakst n fingernail (tiggsnaggst)                                      
                                                                                    
          tikpi·m n squirrel; ground squirrel (thigpiim)                            
                                                                                    
          til n elm tree (till)                                                     
                                                                                    
          timokst n buzzard (timokst)                                               
                                                                                    
          tipel n foot (tippell)                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           tipel ška· n toe (tippell shaa)                                          
                                                                                    
          tiš iv to go (tish)                                                       
                                                                                    
          tokske· n pigeon (thoggskee)                                              
                                                                                    
          tolsiks n crane (tholsiggs)                                               
                                                                                    
          tolš iv to be clear; to be bright; to be good (tolch)                     
                                                                                    
           lak tolš ‘The sky is clear.’ (lacg tolch)                                
                                                                                    
           teŋi·ƛešt tolšt ‘The moon is bright’ (teg-idlesht tolsht)                
                                                                                    
          tops n oak tree (tops)                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          W                                         
                                                                                    
          wak n hail (ouagg)                                                        
                                                                                    
           wak aše·p ‘The hail is large.’ (ouagg ascheebb)                          
                                                                                    
           wakpiš v to hail (waggpish [G.] cf. Y. wakpuh)                           
                                                                                    
          wat n ash tree (ouatt)                                                    
                                                                                    
          wawašt n owl (ouaouasht)                                                  
                                                                                    
          way n stone (ouaì)                                                        
                                                                                    
          we· pro I (ouèè)                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          469                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           we· am ‘I drink.’ (ouèè amm)                                             
                                                                                    
           we· ayake ‘I eat.’ (ouèè ayaquè)                                         
                                                                                    
          wel n rabbit (well)                                                       
                                                                                    
          wil n eye (ouill)                                                         
                                                                                    
          wilko·l n raccoon (wilcool)                                               
                                                                                    
          wiš n hand (ouish)                                                        
                                                                                    
           wiškomak n fist (ouishcoumak)                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           wišnak n finger (nishagg [G.])                                           
                                                                                    
          wišik iv to be large (ouichik)                                            
                                                                                    
          wišin iv to be broad (ouichin)                                            
                                                                                    
          won n dew (ou-onn)                                                        
                                                                                    
           won komn̥st ‘The dew is heavy.’ (ou-onn combnst)                         
                                                                                    
          wo·š n swan (ouoosh)                                                      
                                                                                    
          woš n bow (ouosh)                                                         
                                                                                    
          wošipst iv to whistle (ouoshipst)                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          Y                                         
                                                                                    
          ya·n iv to be blue; to be black (iaan)                                    
                                                                                    
          ya·t iv to eat (iaatt)                                                    
                                                                                    
           we· ayake ‘I eat.’ (ouèè ayaquè)                                         
                                                                                    
          yahan n fish (iagghan [G.])                                               
                                                                                    
          yawne n food (nourishment) (iaoune)                                       
                                                                                    
          yo·k pro we (iook)                                                        
                                                                                    
          yok iv to sing (iok)                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          470                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          yo·l n man; husband (iool)                                                
                                                                                    
           ha yo·l ‘her husband’ (ha iool)                                          
                                                                                    
          yoliš iv to be old (iolish)                                               
                                                                                    
          yoliš n wolf (ioilish [G.])                                               
                                                                                    
          yo·w iv to weep (iōou)                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          471                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          APPENDIX II                                                               
                                                                                    
                        Orkokisak (Western Atakapa) - English Vocabulary            
                                                                                    
           This vocabulary is taken from the publication of de Villiers du Terrage and Rivet (1919:435-36)
                                                                                    
          of the vocabulary gathered by Jean Bérenger in 1721 from nine people captured from near
                                                                                    
          Galveston Bay. Following Swanton, this vocabulary is also called Orkokisak (Akokisa), even
                                                                                    
          though it is not certain that the tribal affiliation of these speakers was indeed Orkokisak, as their
                                                                                    
          tribal name is not given in the sources used by de Villiers du Terrage and Rivet. Each Western
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Atakapa vocabulary item is followed by any comparable word in either Yukhíti (Y) or Hiyékiti
                                                                                    
          (H), the original orthography and the original French gloss.              
                                                                                    
          an n ear [Y án; H. an] (anar) Oreille                                     
                                                                                    
          *es iv to be large [Y hec ‘to be large]                                   
                                                                                    
           kates n toe [Y hiká·t héc ‘big toe’] (quates) orteil                     
                                                                                    
           ošes n thumb [Y wó·š héc] (auxest) pouce                                 
                                                                                    
          est n shoulder (est) épaule                                               
                                                                                    
          *icon iv to be small [Y hicón ‘to be small]                               
                                                                                    
           išicon n star [Y hicón ‘to be small;’ c.f. Y kakáw hicón ‘star,’ lit. ‘small sun’
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           (ichetions) étoiles                                                      
                                                                                    
          ikat n foot [Y hika·t] (icac) pied                                        
                                                                                    
           kates n toe [Y hiká·t héc ‘big toe’] (quates) orteil                     
                                                                                    
          iš n sun [H iš ‘star’] (iche) soleil                                      
                                                                                    
           išicon n star [Y hicón ‘to be small;’ c.f. Y kakáw hicón ‘star,’ lit. ‘small sun’
                                                                                    
           (ichetions) étoiles                                                      
                                                                                    
          it n wind [Y hi] (iit) vent                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          472                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          iƛ n day [Y yíl; H i·ƛ] (idle) jour                                       
                                                                                    
          kams n penis [c.f. Y kámkamš ‘to stick out’] (cams) organs génitaux       
                                                                                    
          kat n mouth [Y kát; H kat] (cat) bouche                                   
                                                                                    
          kates n toe [Y hiká·t héc ‘big toe’] (quates) orteil                      
                                                                                    
          keš n hair [Y te·š; H taheš] (queche) cheveux                             
                                                                                    
          koko n water; sea [Y kawkáw ‘water; rain;’ H kawkaw ‘rain’] (cacaux; cocaue) eau;
                                                                                    
           mer (cf. Caddo kú·kuʔ ‘water’)                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          kosm n knife [cf. Y kocnán ‘knife;’ koc ‘to cut’] (cosme) couteau         
                                                                                    
          koy n neck [Y koy ‘throat;’ H koywak ‘neck’] (coé) cou                    
                                                                                    
          maƛ n thigh [Y mál; H ma·l] (motles) cuisse                               
                                                                                    
          nilto n ship [c.f. Y tú ‘boat’] (niltax) navire                           
                                                                                    
          nok n arm [Y nók; H nok] (noc) bras                                       
                                                                                    
          oc n nose [Y úc; H ict] (audse) nez                                       
                                                                                    
          ok n rope [Y ó·] (ocq) cordage                                            
                                                                                    
           oketa n blanket [c.f. Y ók ‘cloth’] (oqueta) couverture                  
                                                                                    
            oketasen n breeches (oquetasenne) culotte                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           okmeƛ n black blanket [c.f. Y ók ‘cloth;’ mé·l ‘to be black’] (ocqmesle) couverture
                                                                                    
            blanche ou noire                                                        
                                                                                    
          os n tooth [Y óc; H oc] (hos) dent                                        
                                                                                    
          ošes n thumb [Y wó·š héc] (auxest) pouce                                  
                                                                                    
          ošpa n hand [Y wó·š ‘hand;’ wó·špe ‘ten;’ H wiš] (auchepa) main           
                                                                                    
          oƛ n eye [Y wó·l; H wil] (audle) oeil                                     
                                                                                    
          oyt iv to sleep [Y óy; H oy] (oyte) dormir                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          473                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          pemur ‘they shoot’ [c.f. Y pém ‘to shoot’] (pemur) canon                  
                                                                                    
          saš n head [Y iša·t; H ašat] (sache) tête                                 
                                                                                    
          seksa n elbow [Y nokšúk] (secsa) coude                                    
                                                                                    
          semak n finger [c.f. Y wó·š mák ‘fist’] (semacq) doigt                    
                                                                                    
          šak n man [Y išá·k] (chaque) homme                                        
                                                                                    
           šakkam n man’s penis (jacoms) testicules                                 
                                                                                    
          šok kus n vermillion [c.f. Y šók ‘thing;’ kuc ‘to be red’] (chocq cous) vermillion
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          šoknok n feather [c.f. Y šoknók ‘duck’] (chocq nocq) plume                
                                                                                    
          šokpon n paper [c.f. Y šók ‘thing;’ hipons ‘to fold;’ šokyílš hipon ‘book’] (chocponne)
                                                                                    
           papier                                                                   
                                                                                    
          šu n fingernail [Y cúh] (choux) ongle                                     
                                                                                    
          te n wood [c.f. Y té ‘bow] (te) du bois                                   
                                                                                    
          tik n arrow [Y tík] (ticq) poudre á fusil                                 
                                                                                    
          tin n night [Y téŋ ‘dusk;’ H teŋ ‘night’] (tin) nuit                      
                                                                                    
           tiniƛ n moon [H teŋi·ƛešt] (tin-idle) lune                               
                                                                                    
          tus n leg [Y túc; H tec] (tous) jambe                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          wan iv to walk [Y wáŋ] (ouan) marcher                                     
                                                                                    
          wešwa n glass beads [c.f. Y šé ‘pebble’] (oechoua) verroterie             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          474                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          APPENDIX III                                                              
                                                                                    
          Yukhíti kinship terminology                                               
                                                                                    
          Note: These terms were collected from female speakers only.               
                                                                                    
          Second ascending generation:                                              
                                                                                    
          kulšá ‘grandfather’ nilá ‘grandmother’                                    
                                                                                    
          First ascending generation:                                               
                                                                                    
          itéˑt ‘father’ okéˑt ‘mother’ kelé·t / hile·t ‘aunt, maternal or paternal’ wáhš ‘uncle, maternal or
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          paternal’ hišáŋ ‘mother-in-law’ hišáŋ šakyól ‘father-in-law’              
                                                                                    
          Self’s generation                                                         
                                                                                    
          self, female: išn̥ céˑt ‘brother’ išn̥ céˑt hicón ‘younger brother’ išn̥ céˑt hiláy ‘sister-in-law’ lé·t
                                                                                    
          ‘sister’ hišileˑt ‘younger sister’ išiwéˑt ‘elder sister’ wéˑt ‘sister or female cousin’ ipén / ipénta
                                                                                    
          ‘male cousin’ lé·tta ‘female cousin’ hipá ‘husband’                       
                                                                                    
          self, male: n̥ céˑt ‘brother (?)’ iškišéˑt ‘sister’ hiláy ‘wife’          
                                                                                    
          First descending generation                                               
                                                                                    
          iškišíl ‘daughter’ hiyóˑl ‘son’ hiyó·l yúc ‘elder son’ hiyo·l hicón ‘younger son’ nómš ‘child’ téns
                                                                                    
          ‘nephew’ tensá ‘niece’                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Second descending generation                                              
                                                                                    
          níl ‘grandchild; granddaughter(?)’ kúlš (?) ‘grandson’                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                          475                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          INDEX                                                                     
                                                                                    
          absolutive, 144, 145, 146, 150-151, 167, 168, 266                         
                                                                                    
          accent, 24-33                                                             
                                                                                    
          accent, nominal, 30-33                                                    
                                                                                    
          accent, pitch levels, 25-28                                               
                                                                                    
          accent, verbal, 27-30                                                     
                                                                                    
          action performed in water (?), 331-332                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          action performed sitting, 98-99                                           
                                                                                    
          action performed standing, 99-100                                         
                                                                                    
          action performed standing, plural, 100                                    
                                                                                    
          action performed with an instrument, 105-108                              
                                                                                    
          adjectival noun pluralization, 163-164                                    
                                                                                    
          adjectives, 106-107, 111-115, 143-144, 146, 162, 163-164, 180, 190-192, 218
                                                                                    
          adjectives, comparison, 111-115                                           
                                                                                    
          adverbs, 107-111, 112, 114, 139, 173, 176-177, 191-192, 222-223           
                                                                                    
          agentive nouns, 179, 180                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Akokisa (see Orkokisak)                                                   
                                                                                    
          Alabama, 181                                                              
                                                                                    
          allophonic variation, 39                                                  
                                                                                    
          almost, 74-75                                                             
                                                                                    
          animacy, 143-144, 145                                                     
                                                                                    
          antipassive, 97, 126, 128, 229                                            
                                                                                    
          aorist mode, 42-46                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         476                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          areal comparisons, 226-231                                                
                                                                                    
          aspect suffixes, 74-88                                                    
                                                                                    
          aspiration, 34-35                                                         
                                                                                    
          Atakapa, Central (see Yukhíti)                                            
                                                                                    
          Atakapa, Eastern (see Hiyékiti)                                           
                                                                                    
          Atakapa, Western (see Orkokisak)                                          
                                                                                    
          Bérenger, Jean, 11, 472                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          before, 84-85                                                             
                                                                                    
          burial practices, traditional, 255, 306, 313-325                          
                                                                                    
          Caddo, 17, 68, 181, 228, 456                                              
                                                                                    
          Calcasieu River, 11, 184                                                  
                                                                                    
          causative, 119, 120-123                                                   
                                                                                    
          Chickasaw, 138, 212                                                       
                                                                                    
          Chitimacha, 13, 15, 16, 17, 40, 68, 84, 137, 138, 140, 181, 182, 183, 212, 226-228, 260, 456
                                                                                    
          Choctaw, 11, 181, 258, 262, 266, 324                                      
                                                                                    
          Civil War, 296, 306                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          clausal complements, 200-201, 212                                         
                                                                                    
          comparison of adjectives, 111-115                                         
                                                                                    
          conjunction, nominal, 202-203, 227-228                                    
                                                                                    
          conjunction, verbal, 203-206, 210                                         
                                                                                    
          conjunctions, independent, 208                                            
                                                                                    
          consonant assimilation, 37-38                                             
                                                                                    
          consonants, 20-21                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         477                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          continuative, 78-79                                                       
                                                                                    
          continuative, future, 79-81                                               
                                                                                    
          coordinate contexts, 208-210                                              
                                                                                    
          copular sentences, 201                                                    
                                                                                    
          Creek, 27, 138, 212                                                       
                                                                                    
          customary, 81-83                                                          
                                                                                    
          Cyprien, 296, 305, 306                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          deictics, 171-173                                                         
                                                                                    
          desiderative, 75-78                                                       
                                                                                    
          desiderative, negative, 78                                                
                                                                                    
          detransitivizing prefixes, 126-129                                        
                                                                                    
          directional case, 145, 151-154, 180-181, 185, 194-195, 252, 253, 254, 256, 281
                                                                                    
          directional prefixes, 97, 100-106                                         
                                                                                    
          disjunction, nominal, 202-203                                             
                                                                                    
          disjunction, verbal, 205-207                                              
                                                                                    
          distributive numerals, 177-178                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          dubitative mode, 50-52, 53                                                
                                                                                    
          dummy object, 126, 127                                                    
                                                                                    
          Duralde, Martin, 11, 15, 457                                              
                                                                                    
          elative case, 145, 156-157, 192, 194                                      
                                                                                    
          ergative case, 105, 139, 143, 145-150, 168, 182, 185-186, 188, 189, 199, 214, 229, 253, 266,
                                                                                    
          280, 331                                                                  
                                                                                    
          ergativity, 137, 185-186, 223, 226                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         478                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Fanchonette, 185, 252, 332                                                
                                                                                    
          first-person prefixes, 93-94                                              
                                                                                    
          fluid-s, 185, 186-189, 228                                                
                                                                                    
          focus, 139, 144, 167, 168, 197-200, 254, 265, 266, 294, 305, 330          
                                                                                    
          Franklin, Louisiana, 11                                                   
                                                                                    
          French, 181, 183, 225, 231, 250, 282, 305, 311, 332, 455, 456             
                                                                                    
          future continuative, 79-81                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          future mode, 52-54                                                        
                                                                                    
          Gallatin, Albert, 15, 457                                                 
                                                                                    
          Galveston Bay, 11                                                         
                                                                                    
          gapping, 230                                                              
                                                                                    
          Gaschet, Albert S., 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 24, 25, 145, 151, 161, 182, 183, 186, 202,
                                                                                    
          204, 226, 229, 232, 233, 240, 251, 252, 253, 254, 256, 258, 259, 262, 266, 268, 269, 279, 280,
                                                                                    
          282, 294-295, 296, 297, 306, 307, 312, 324, 325, 331, 332                 
                                                                                    
          geminate consonants, 21, 37-38, 40                                        
                                                                                    
          gerund, 63-66, 179, 278, 279, 282, 307, 324                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Gursky, Karl-Heinz, 15, 39-40, 226                                        
                                                                                    
          h, variable initial, 37                                                   
                                                                                    
          h-stopping, 36                                                            
                                                                                    
          Haas, Mary R., 40, 226                                                    
                                                                                    
          habitual, 83-84                                                           
                                                                                    
          Hiyékiti (Eastern Atakapa), 11, 13, 14, 15, 18, 22, 35, 182, 226, 227, 457-471, 472, 473, 474
                                                                                    
          hortative, 44-46                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         479                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Huntington, Ambrose, 17, 141                                              
                                                                                    
          Huntington, Louison, 13, 18, 283 (see also Kišyuc)                        
                                                                                    
          idiomatic expressions, 220-226                                            
                                                                                    
          imperative, 44-46                                                         
                                                                                    
          incorporated noun, 88, 96-97, 126-129, 229                                
                                                                                    
          indefinite object, 95                                                     
                                                                                    
          Indian Lake (see Lake Prien)                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          inessive case, 63, 145, 157-159, 192, 193-194, 249, 250, 252, 261, 314    
                                                                                    
          inessive case noun derivation, 157-158, 250                               
                                                                                    
          infinitive, 63                                                            
                                                                                    
          infinitive, negative, 307                                                 
                                                                                    
          infixation, 134-137                                                       
                                                                                    
          instrumental use of ergative case, 148-150                                
                                                                                    
          instrumental use of inessive case, 157-158                                
                                                                                    
          instrumental verbal prefix, 105-106, 148                                  
                                                                                    
          interrogative, 214-219                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Kaufman, David, 15-16, 45                                                 
                                                                                    
          Kiletkiš, 281, 296, 334                                                   
                                                                                    
          kin terms, 41, 255, 475                                                   
                                                                                    
          Kiškicaw, 256, 297, 333                                                   
                                                                                    
          Kišmok, 283-284, 295, 332, 333                                            
                                                                                    
          Kišyuc, 13, 16, 35, 38, 42, 178, 182, 183, 232, 233, 250, 252, 253. 254, 256, 258, 263, 265, 267,
                                                                                    
          283, 295, 296, 297, 467                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         480                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Koasati, 17, 84, 111, 118, 124, 138, 140, 181, 182, 184, 212, 218, 232, 259, 296, 306, 313, 323,
                                                                                    
          455, 456                                                                  
                                                                                    
          Lake Charles, 11, 333                                                     
                                                                                    
          Lake Prien, 11, 262, 283, 306, 333                                        
                                                                                    
          Ló (chief), 252, 333                                                      
                                                                                    
          Ló (village), 11, 306, 333                                                
                                                                                    
          Lo, Adele, 283, 333                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Lo, Celanie, 283, 333                                                     
                                                                                    
          Lo, Narcisse, 283, 333                                                    
                                                                                    
          loan translations, 182, 225-226                                           
                                                                                    
          locational prefixes, 97-99                                                
                                                                                    
          locative case, 154-156, 192, 195, 262, 296                                
                                                                                    
          locative compounds, 195-197, 279                                          
                                                                                    
          marriage customs, 246, 254                                                
                                                                                    
          medicine, traditional, 275-276, 280, 309-313                              
                                                                                    
          Mobilian jargon, 16                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          modal split, 47, 50                                                       
                                                                                    
          mode, aorist, 42-46                                                       
                                                                                    
          mode, dubitative, 50-52                                                   
                                                                                    
          mode, future, 52-54                                                       
                                                                                    
          mode, preterite, 47-50                                                    
                                                                                    
          mode, progressive, 54-56                                                  
                                                                                    
          mode, subordinate, 57-63                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         481                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Moss, Delilah, 13, 17 (see also Tottokš)                                  
                                                                                    
          motion back, 97, 102-103                                                  
                                                                                    
          motion coming, 97, 101-102                                                
                                                                                    
          motion towards, 97, 100-101                                               
                                                                                    
          motion upwards, 97, 103-105                                               
                                                                                    
          Munro, Pamela, 40, 263                                                    
                                                                                    
          mutual intelligibility of Yukhíti and Hiyékiti, 18                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Nahuatl, 17                                                               
                                                                                    
          nasals, syllabic, 23-24                                                   
                                                                                    
          Natchez, 84, 124, 139, 140, 181, 212, 231, 256                            
                                                                                    
          negation, 70-74                                                           
                                                                                    
          negation, suppletive, 71-73                                               
                                                                                    
          negative desiderative, 78                                                 
                                                                                    
          negative imperative, 44, 73-74                                            
                                                                                    
          negative infinitive, 307                                                  
                                                                                    
          Nolkop, 297                                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          nominal accentuation, 30-33                                               
                                                                                    
          nominal cases, 145-159                                                    
                                                                                    
          nominal conjunction, 202-203, 227-228                                     
                                                                                    
          nominal derivation with inessive case, 157-158, 251                       
                                                                                    
          nominal morphology, order of, 144                                         
                                                                                    
          nominalization of verbs, 179-180                                          
                                                                                    
          noun borrowing, 181                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         482                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          noun compounding, 159, 163, 180-181                                       
                                                                                    
          noun formation, 179-182                                                   
                                                                                    
          noun pluralization, 143, 159-165                                          
                                                                                    
          noun pluralization, irregular, 164                                        
                                                                                    
          noun pluralization, adjectival, 163-164                                   
                                                                                    
          noun pluralization, prefixed, 160-161                                     
                                                                                    
          noun pluralization, suffixed, 161-163                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          noun possession, 165-168                                                  
                                                                                    
          nouns, animate, 143-144, 145, 185                                         
                                                                                    
          nouns, mass, 144, 165, 167                                                
                                                                                    
          nouns plural in form and singular in meaning, 164-165                     
                                                                                    
          numerals, 158, 176-179                                                    
                                                                                    
          numerals, adverbial, 176-177                                              
                                                                                    
          numerals, distributive, 177-178                                           
                                                                                    
          numerals, lack of ordinal, 178                                            
                                                                                    
          object/patient prefixes, 46-47                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          omitted inflection, 208-210                                               
                                                                                    
          ordinal numerals, lack of, 178                                            
                                                                                    
          Orkokisak (Western Atakapa), 11, 13, 17, 20, 22, 226, 227, 472-474        
                                                                                    
          orthography, 19-20                                                        
                                                                                    
          orthographic apostrophe, 19                                               
                                                                                    
          orthographic h, lack of, 36                                               
                                                                                    
          orthographic hyphen, 19                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         483                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          orthographic x, 36                                                        
                                                                                    
          Palnal, 254, 265, 324, 332                                                
                                                                                    
          participle, 67-68                                                         
                                                                                    
          past progressive, 85-86                                                   
                                                                                    
          phonemes, 20                                                              
                                                                                    
          phonetic processes, 33-37                                                 
                                                                                    
          phonological processes, 37-39                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          phrase-terminal marker, 80, 87-88, 257                                    
                                                                                    
          pitch levels, 25-27                                                       
                                                                                    
          Ponponne, 283 (see also Kišmok)                                           
                                                                                    
          possessor raising, 210-211                                                
                                                                                    
          postpositions, 116-117, 145, 151-152, 173-175                             
                                                                                    
          pre-aspiration, 35-38                                                     
                                                                                    
          prefixed noun pluralization, 160-161                                      
                                                                                    
          preterite mode, 47-50                                                     
                                                                                    
          preterite, resultative, 48, 50                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          progressive mode, 54-56                                                   
                                                                                    
          pronoun, resumptive, 166, 214                                             
                                                                                    
          pronouns, 168-171                                                         
                                                                                    
          quantifiers, 176, 190 (see also numerals)                                 
                                                                                    
          reduplication, 129-137, 306                                               
                                                                                    
          reduplication, simple, 129-134                                            
                                                                                    
          reduplication with infixation, 134-137, 331                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         484                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          reflexive, 88-90                                                          
                                                                                    
          relative clause equivalents, 63, 212-213, 281                             
                                                                                    
          religion, traditional, 243-244, 253-254                                   
                                                                                    
          Reon, Armojean (Onezime), 13, 18, 333                                     
                                                                                    
          resumptive pronoun, 166, 214                                              
                                                                                    
          second-person prefixes, 94-95                                             
                                                                                    
          Skin-Desirer, 259-262                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          split-s, 42, 46, 68, 185                                                  
                                                                                    
          stative verbs, 68-70                                                      
                                                                                    
          stative verbs, transitive, 185, 199-200                                   
                                                                                    
          stylistics, literary, 232, 259, 263, 325                                  
                                                                                    
          subordinate mode, 57-63                                                   
                                                                                    
          sun goddess, 254                                                          
                                                                                    
          Šukuhuy, 295, 297, 306, 323                                               
                                                                                    
          suppletion, 138                                                           
                                                                                    
          Swadesh, Morris, 15, 40, 226                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Swanton, John R., 12, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 22, 25, 37, 40, 41, 124, 145, 183, 184, 226, 228, 231,
                                                                                    
          233, 242, 243, 251, 253, 256, 259, 262, 266, 267, 280, 291-292, 294-295, 296, 307, 312, 324,
                                                                                    
          325, 332                                                                  
                                                                                    
          syllable canon, 30-22                                                     
                                                                                    
          syncope, 39                                                               
                                                                                    
          third-person plural object, 91-93                                         
                                                                                    
          Tonkawa, 68, 227-229, 456                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         485                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Tottokš, 13, 17, 35, 36, 66, 178, 182, 184, 198-199, 231, 232, 233, 248-249, 251, 252, 253, 254,
                                                                                    
          256, 258, 259, 262, 263, 265-266, 267, 268, 280, 281, 283, 295, 296, 297, 306, 323, 324, 332,
                                                                                    
          333, 334                                                                  
                                                                                    
          transitive stative verbs, 185, 199-200                                    
                                                                                    
          transitivizer 123-124                                                     
                                                                                    
          Túl Núŋ (village), 11, 305, 332, 333                                      
                                                                                    
          Tunica, 212, 226, 259                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          valence-changing suffix, 126                                              
                                                                                    
          variable initial h, 37                                                    
                                                                                    
          variation, allophonic, 39                                                 
                                                                                    
          verb pluralization, 129-138                                               
                                                                                    
          verb plurals in -m, 137-138                                               
                                                                                    
          verb root, 27                                                             
                                                                                    
          verbal accent, 27-30                                                      
                                                                                    
          verbal conjunction, 203-210                                               
                                                                                    
          verbal derivational prefixes, 129                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          verbal derivational processes, 115-129                                    
                                                                                    
          verbal derivational suffixes, 119-126                                     
                                                                                    
          verbal prefixes, 88-106                                                   
                                                                                    
          verbal prefixes, order of elements, 88                                    
                                                                                    
          verbal suffix -šim ‘to be nothing but N’, 124-127                         
                                                                                    
          verbalization, 115-119                                                    
                                                                                    
          Verdine, Delilah, 17 (see also Tottokš)                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         486                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          Verdine, Teet (Rosemond), 13, 17, 183                                     
                                                                                    
          Vermillion Bay, 11                                                        
                                                                                    
          vowel coalescence, 38-39                                                  
                                                                                    
          vowel length, 22-23, 38-39                                                
                                                                                    
          vowel weakening, 33-34                                                    
                                                                                    
          vowels, 22-24                                                             
                                                                                    
          white people as dead people, 163, 183, 262                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
          word order, 189-195                                                       
                                                                                    
          Yoyot (see Kišyuc)                                                        
                                                                                    
          Yuchi, 138                                                                
                                                                                    
          Yukhíti (Central Atakapa), 11, 13, 17, 18, 22-23, 35, 40, 182, 226, 228, 306, 340-456, 472
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                         487                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    